---
title: Can You Teach Thinking?
---

Knowledge, including knowledge of Systems approach, fits into the head in steps, from simple to complex. How to identify these steps? What needs to be trained, what unusual mental work for the brain should be made habitual?

Here we need to introduce the concept of **counterintuitiveness**. We live in an intuitively understandable world. Our brains run on the intuitive, inexplicable mental rails of "fast thinking S1" according to Kahneman, like a tram—on the same route. We were born, and these rails gradually laid themselves in our brains (in the case of many years of work, this is called "experience", in arts— "exposure", in literature— "reading"), and thinking rides on them and usually bypasses the effective modern ways of solving problems known to today's civilization, making it impossible to solve complex problems. Because new knowledge does not get into "exposure" and "reading", you just haven't seen it yet! You can't remember what you haven't memorized! You can invent, but there's no guarantee that you will always invent something truly effective and brilliant.

Where do our intuitions come from, how do we know that this is exactly how we should think? Most often, we can't even remember where we first learned that teeth are brushed with a toothbrush and paste, and not a chewed twig of the sacred Udumbara tree, as was customary in India. Reflection (awareness of past thinking situations) leads us to suppose that there can be other options besides intuitive ones—counterintuitive.

Look out the window—and there the Earth is flat. When we are told that the Earth is round, what do we respond? "That's not true, look out the window." They reply: "What are you talking about? The Earth is round, look at the horizon...", but we persist: "You are talking about unnecessary things, what's beyond the horizon, but everyone can see that there's nothing there. No need to talk about the distant horizon and what's beyond it, let's talk about Earth, here it is—the flat Earth." All life intuition shows that the Earth is flat, people walk on it with their feet, and the feet certainly know that the Earth is not round! But somehow, some people, concerned with scales not only of 10 kilometers but of 1000 kilometers, get the thought of "Earth—round", they begin to think so—and find no contradictions in such thinking^[<https://theflatearthsociety.org/>].
After some time it turns out that besides Earth there is also Space with its vacuum, spaceships fly there "always falling but never falling". This is already incomprehensible because with the idea of a flat Earth, the flying of spaceships in a circle with sufficient speed so as never to fall—this is impossible to understand. There is a discrepancy with experimental results/measurements. The explanations about the round Earth are counterintuitive, they do not correspond to the "folk theory" of the flat Earth, but it needs to be taken seriously (i.e., build your projects based on it) because it gives better predictions than the theory of the flat Earth.

**The concept** **of "counterintuitiveness," which can and should be heard as "anti-popularity" and "culturalism/practicality/method-following," is important. Every time problems arise with understanding how geniuses work, possessing some art that no one can understand and after understanding repeat and improve, deeply counterintuitive explanations are to be expected.**

The tram of thought in geniuses runs on completely different rails than those laid in the brains of most people. Finding these "other rails" in a genius's brain, laying them in your own brain, and running your brain tram on them is usually very difficult.

A genius somehow, often not consciously, did something completely different from everyone else, he just started to do something contradicting the intuition of everyone else, and he began to succeed. And everyone else acts intuitively, "in a folk way," "like everyone," and they fail. And while at the level of the genius's consciousness, or those who try to model the thinking of the genius, it has not come to conceptual thinking, what exactly this counterintuitiveness is, new objects have not got their names-terms, you cannot transmit this knowledge to other people, you cannot teach anyone this knowledge.

You cannot teach a director of development (here we give, of course, a conditional job title) of a large holding, a dancer, or a politician if you do not conceptually know at the level of consciousness what he should do in his work, following the best methods/practices/processes/culture/style/strategy. After all, one must teach what he should think about, what concepts to use in thinking. The director of development must be taught, he should not just grow by himself like a tree in a forest. From hunting and gathering talents, we need to move to sedentary agriculture, growing talents. This is engineering, changing the world for the better. Moreover, such an approach allows later automating the work of the development director, shifting some of the work to AI, or shifting some work to employees if a corresponding AI has not yet been found. But this is possible only if you understand what part of the work can be shifted and what cannot, how to describe the shiftable part of the work of enterprise development, why this developmental activity should be conducted at all, what its essence is, what concepts will be involved in thinking about the development of this large holding.

How does art differ from engineering? In art—once you got lucky, inspiration came, a masterpiece turned out. Another time you were not lucky, there was no inspiration—there will be no masterpiece. In engineering (hardware, software, genetic, enterprise, dance, personality, community, etc.), we cannot do so, **we need to work** **consistently well, we need** **the best (and not any) methods** **of thinking, giving invariably excellent results** **in typical cases.** **And only from this already high** **'typical'** **level of quality** **in typical cases** **does art begin, distinguishing brilliant breakthrough works** **in atypical cases.** **Of course, there is no art** **without** **art, but still in engineering we want stable success and most often realize this desire!**

**Wishes** **'not to limit creative freedom with templates'** **are not suitable here: people massively inventing mental bicycles are very likely** **to get not the best solution.** **Arguments** **'creativity instead of templates'** **are true** **only for individual** **geniuses,** **and even they in rare cases. In** **most other cases, template mental solutions** **give** **high** **quality while minimizing mental effort.** **It is unlikely you are the very single** **genius, and you have the very single** **case** **'beyond the limits known to civilization',** **when you can demonstrate the highest art of working with solutions invented by you personally** **'beyond textbooks'.** **Most likely, you do not understand very well how you think, what** **thinking methods** **you follow. This needs to be urgently corrected: understand how you think and learn better thinking methods.**

Again, geniuses are not called all "creators", but only those who show the quality of thinking better than the best known at the moment (state-of-the-art) mental templates—and after that their solutions become templates, not genius. These newly appearing in civilization templates of good thinking must be immediately made explicit, documented (preferably in the form of training courses as an adequate form of documenting thinking methods, but instructions/regulations/corporate standards can also be used, and consider how easy it is to teach those agents for whom they were written. Learning to work by regulations is bad, they are only good for checking how they already work!).

Identifying templates/"executing algorithms" in methods/styles of good thinking is the work of a **culturologist**, describing them—a **methodologist**, forming these templates into training courses—the work of a **methodist/instructional** **designer.** For more on these (and many other) typical roles in engineering some mastery in humans and AI, see the course "Personality Engineering".

How is non-reflected, unconscious art or craft transmitted? A student looks at dozens, hundreds, thousands of works of masters, learns to understand the slang of professionals as they learn their native language (without textbooks and dictionaries, just "from conversations"), constantly looks at how real masters work and tries to copy it—right according to the saying "monkey see, monkey do". This is the term "experience" (joking here about "twenty years of experience—is a one-year experience repeated twenty times"), "exposure" (which many had in college, then they froze in their development). Then, three out of ten students start having some correct rails for their professional mental trams in their heads, and they begin to think fast and make few mistakes in typical situations. And seven out of ten—do not develop, and they continue to make many mistakes in typical situations. Learning art or craft is not "transmission of conceptual knowledge", it does not use human rationality.

We need nine out of ten students to be able to learn a new method (say, the method of Systems thinking). It is quite possible to imagine that there will be one out of ten students who is completely incapable (severely undereducated in childhood, "from the jungle"), or extremely lazy, or just did not allocate enough time for learning due to some insurmountable external circumstances (for example, got sick), so we will not teach all ten even in the best case. But teaching only three out of ten students won't suit us, we need to teach more, nine! This means we need to take such counterintuitive knowledge for teaching that it cannot come quickly to the minds of students, make its minimal compact and understandable description (conceptual! So that it can be expressed in words!), and then somehow transmit it to the students, so it fits into their heads. The question is: is this possible in areas traditionally considered "art", and considered impossible to teach rationally? Yes, it happens all around! This is the **way of Western civilization: turning** **"art"** **(including the art of thinking)** **after its modeling and rationalization** **into quickly** **conceptually** **transmitted mastery from person to person in the course of structured learning.**

When you find the right concepts and the right mental operations with them, and the right exercises for speeding up the "automation" of thinking (repetition of mental moves helps translate slow, conscious laborious thinking S2 into fast, effortless S1), then after learning students won't even understand what was difficult for them to do before learning. They will think fluently in a new way (S1), but will be unable to recall what "folk rails to nowhere" their thinking rolled on before learning (S1) and how hard it was to think during learning (S2). Therefore, masters (yesterday's students) will be amazed by the behavior of untrained novices, including their own behavior in the period before mastering one or another method/culture/style/method of work. Ask a child why he was very bad at multiplying just a year ago—he won't be able to explain why. Now multiplication is quite natural for him and does not require the exertion of all his mental efforts as it did a year ago. But give him to multiply matrices—and everything will repeat: first, it will be incomprehensible, then difficult, then again it will be poorly remembered what was incomprehensible and difficult there.