---
title: Temptation of Complexity
---

A common mistake among novice Systems thinkers is to choose extremely complex cases for their first attempts at Systems thinking, which would be difficult even for experienced Systems thinkers. Primarily, these are situations related to long information technology chains. In programming, the conversation is usually not about the physical world but about manipulating long chains of descriptions stored in the databases of various applications, somehow related to software-implemented algorithms and not evidently connected to the physical world. The course clearly states that systems are physical. Some schools of Systems thinking allow for non-physical systems, but not ours—this usually leads not to rigorous reasoning but informal fantasizing, detachment from physical reality, a lack of grounding. The course will provide studies on future generations of Systems thinking, which consider how to think about parts and wholes for descriptions. However, grounding is achieved through understanding that a physical agent is thinking about these parts and wholes. But this is clearly a complex case, a frontier of Systems thinking, which has not yet entered textbooks.

Software and its databases are descriptions, and these are not always descriptions of the physical world; often, they are descriptions of other descriptions. In the case of software, “reaching out to the physical world” often also means understanding the engineering of the enterprise that will use the software, implying some knowledge of management. Patience and qualification to untangle these long chains of descriptions and acquire knowledge of applied engineering of various systems (including the most complex systems-enterprises, systems-personalities) are lacking in novice thinkers, and warnings to be cautious when working with IT projects are not heeded. Therefore, they immediately say, “my target system is a program that implements an algorithm,” although our course discusses numerous mistakes that often occur when making such statements—these mistakes become apparent a little later but are initially not perceived by students as mistakes. The same applies to mastery as a target system, as it is just another “program implementing an algorithm for some method,” only not for a classical computer, but for an agent based on a neural network computer (human or robot) and tools. Sometimes, a community or even a society is chosen as the first target system: a system consisting of many individual agents with strong intelligence and unclear boundaries. Similarly complex is the case of the target system “internet” or some other computer network.

It's like a first-grade music school student trying to play the latest orchestral hit heard on the radio on the piano for the first try—yes, directly all the instruments in this orchestra, let’s try on my piano, tell me how to play this by evening, especially this wonderful drum part! The teacher can only sadly say that right now—it’s impossible to play, especially the drum part. Dealing with complex corporate IT projects and human agents are the worst options to start working with Systems thinking. Unfortunately, this remark stops few people. But it exists, go back and reread it. Surely, somewhere in your large work project, there is a small subproject involving individual systems for which you can easily determine their boundaries in space-time (furniture in the office, a physical computer with a power supply, a building), meaning you can easily agree on what exactly the physical objects that are these systems are. Start with those.

By definition, org-projects are complicated because they involve people. People are very, very hard to model because personalities are much more complex than classical cyber-physical systems. We have a course “Engineering of Personality” that discusses this in more detail, but it is taken after the courses on Systems thinking and methodology, as well as Systems engineering. Mastery is part of personality which, in turn, is part of an agent. Besides mastery implemented by the “hardware” of the computer, the agent also has its organism, actually the hardware. It turns out that an agent with strong intelligence (e.g., a human) is a software-hardware complex, where the personality is the “software,” and “mastery” is one of the application programs in this software. This is not so complex; after a couple of months of studying Systems thinking, it should be clear. But taking the system “mastery” and “personality” as a target system right away will immediately lead to many, many mistakes. Like riding a mountain bike on the most difficult course of the steepest and wildest mountain instead of trying to ride the first one hundred meters on a flat road. This can, of course, be done, but be prepared for bruises and fractures.

An organization is the next systemic level after personalities, which means it is even more complex (it is necessary to understand the frustrations that arise between people and the organization, the organization and the surrounding communities, as well as society as a whole). We have a course “Systems Management” that tells more about the engineering of organizations. The main idea there is that functional systems are organizational roles performing some methods/practices of work, whereas org-links are subdivisions, commissions, project work groups. And the minimal org-link there would be a person or AI-agent. The analogy to “mastery” there would be the “org-capability” of the organization to carry out work in some role by some method. This “org-capability” will consist of the coordinated and supported with resources and authorities mastery of the agents making up the org-link. So, all the complexities of "mastery" remain, but they are multiplied by the fact that in the organization, the work of various agents is coordinated at the moment when they engage their mastery in the work. “Engage in work”—we remember that "method/culture/style/strategy of work" differs from the very “work,” right? The details on this difference will, of course, be there, but they will mainly be given in the methodology course, which will come after the Systems thinking course. So, we do not recommend choosing an organization as a target system. In fact, we do not recommend choosing an organization as a target system even for managers, which is a common mistake among them. For managers who consider an organization to be their target system, it works splendidly, but the engineering systems it produces do not. People are fed, machines are lubricated, computers are buzzing—but there are problems with the products, as they do not fall into the manager's consideration, so the organization is not target. The target system of an organization, the product of the enterprise (including a product that the organization changes with its service)—this should be the target system even for a manager.

You need certain knowledge and experience to think about all these types of complex systems involving classical computer software and not very classical “knowledge software” for agents with strong intelligence (people, organizations, AI-agents, collective systems of people, organizations, AI-agents). It is important to have “knowledge and experience,” not just “life experience.” You already need to have sufficiently strong intelligence, as the behavior of people and AI-agents is surprising in its diversity and presents unexpected challenges in projects. Intelligence is needed to understand these surprises and solve numerous problems. If you have a hammer in your project, it will behave roughly as described in the textbooks on hammers. If you have Vasya or Dasha, they will not behave necessarily as described in textbooks on people. Moreover, they will deliberately behave differently if they know you want to manipulate them based on textbook knowledge. You also act like this, so why shouldn't they? If you have an organization of a couple of thousand Vasyas and Dashas, it also might not behave as you expect—and strong intelligence (including mastery of Systems thinking) will help you understand.

But besides intelligence, you need some kind of knowledge support in thinking about these complex objects. Our courses on Systems engineering, engineering of personality, and Systems management (as the engineering of organization) will help you with this. Ideally, further courses on community engineering (including communities such as the clientele of an enterprise and investors—those who have invested in the enterprise) would help, but we do not currently have such courses; we are only developing them. You will take these courses only after completing the “thinking minimum” to enhance your intelligence (courses on rational work, Systems thinking, methodology, Systems engineering).

And yet, most of the first systems that novice Systems thinkers want to think about turn out to be systems with software and people, because we work in a world surrounded by software and people, and recently also by “undead” (AI software, which behaves more like humans than classic computer software). Of course, we try to quickly cover how to think about software, people, AI-agents, and organizations created from them in our courses, but try not to take such systems as your target ones. It’s too complex! You will get confused! A first-grader shouldn't tackle differential equations; they need to start practicing arithmetic first!

If you are talking about a city (community) or a country (society), the situation in Systems modeling is even more complex than with an enterprise. In an enterprise, you might still manage to influence something as there are provisions for issuing instructions—people are organized. If people are not organized (it's unclear who is the boss and who is the subordinate on some issues, you can't assign work), then the possibilities of purposeful action by one person or even a team of people are small (unless you are, of course, a commander of a small armed detachment financed by taxpayer money). Your thinking about communities and societies will be unproductive—novice Systems thinkers’ thinking will be rife with errors due to the extreme complexity of such situations.

Various agents that you want to organize in your community or society creation project will have different preferences; they all try to do something on their own to realize their “wants” of varying levels of thoughtfulness, they are not waiting for your actions and generally (often justifiably) consider them unthoughtful and not conforming to SoTA (best known today, State-of-The-Art) work methods, do not consider them stylish/cultural, are not waiting for you to think systematically about them—they do not dream of you planning their lives and will surely fiercely resist your proposals. Just as you would do when someone from this course decides to plan your life. So, do not plan their lives, neither in your country nor in a neighboring one! First, deal with simple "iron" systems, then with yourself as a personality, then learn to organize small teams, then large organizations, and with such organizations' efforts, you will be able to significantly change their environment, that is, communities and societies.

**Go back and reread these warnings: where there is a lot of information technology**, **including AI-agents, and** **people** **(and often in the project there is both software and people and** **AI—and something of it is even unnoticed, “a fish does not notice water,” even you yourself—it’s people, and your** **work is supported by software), be careful with the first examples of Systems thinking. Don’t take such examples. Don’t start with your most confused work project; you will only get disappointed. If you started learning Swahili yesterday, don’t get involved in a situation of simultaneous translation at a business meeting of** **military and businessmen, except for troubles, nothing will come out of it. Wait until you achieve some fluency. Practice on simpler projects with less information technology and fewer people.**

Of course, this creates enormous difficulties in organizing the training: a person has maximum difficulties in his current projects, and he learns a tool to reduce this complexity, but just hitting this epicenter of complexity with his current skills is not possible; you need at least some training on simpler examples before that!

Estimates for achieving initial fluency in Systems thinking (taking our course) are approximately **20-30 active days of two to three hours daily** plus **approximately** **eighteen to twenty** **hours** **of classes** **with an instructor** **or teacher.**

Systems thinking is not the only course in the intelligence stack that a modern adult needs to take. We aim for about a year's work, completed over two semesters (our course is in the second semester of this work).

For such training, you need to change your lifestyle because those few hours must come from somewhere, rearrange your typical daily schedule. It's like enrolling in a full-time or part-time physics and math school or evening master's program: working hard for several years to get other life opportunities. Studying, in general, is an ungrateful activity: if you studied all weekend from morning to evening, no one would praise you—it’s not a job that can be significantly advanced in a couple of days, and everyone will notice. No, you will have to spend many days without immediate rewards. But this will later allow you to claim other jobs and another level of rewards. For the Systems thinking course, there is a mandatory prerequisite course “Rational Work,” which teaches, among other things, how to gather yourself and reorganize your life to find time for education (learning intelligence stack thinking methods, enhancing intelligence) and applied learning of different methods/cultures of working with some specific types of systems.

A “specialist” is someone who understood everything (mainly from a textbook, not in life) and can talk about problems; they can appropriately quote a textbook describing some method. The specialist will do nothing but talk.

A “practitioner” is someone who managed to fit into a project and bring benefit to it, agree with everyone (a sign of success: they coordinated their work with others). A practitioner should already be able to think about how the project is arranged to agree with everyone, so they must be able to think about organizations of all kinds of agents (people, AI, and even other organizations).

A “master” (here we use another meaning of the term “master” as a name for the qualification degree in mastery. **Several different meanings of the term** **“master” are discussed in the “Engineering of Personality” course**) already understands that “agreeing with everyone” is useless—if the agreements of other agents (people and their organizations) regarding the release of the target system change, then their agreements with everyone also change. Therefore, the master is engaged in organizational development: agreeing everyone, changing the organization, reorganizing enterprises, teaching people to do something new. And here, of course, one needs to think about people as systems, about such systems as AI-agents, about such systems as organizations of people and AI-agents. The next qualification is “reformer,” where it turns out that “you can't make a clean production in a dirty puddle,” and you will need to create clubs, business ecosystems, communities (clientele)—and here you will already need developed thinking about community systems. A “revolutionary” thinks about societies. But for now, let's start with the “specialist” and learn to think about some simple systems, for which it is obvious what physical objects they are.