---
title: 'Applicability of Systems Thinking: Everywhere and Always'
---

The last obstacle to thinking systemically is simply the lack of such thinking, failing to consider types of Systems thinking in discussions. You just don't look for target systems in the world, you don't initially consider their systemic environment at the time of operation (even if the operation will be in the future), then you don't consider their parts-subsystems, methods of their creation, and only then do you pay attention to the creators. The author has encountered cases where people spent a lot of time mastering Systems thinking and even reached some fluency in its use when they were clearly pointed out the need for systemic thoughts in a complex situation. But in the critical situations of their own work projects, they simply forgot to use it! This is unsurprising and not specific to Systems thinking: usually, people know how to perform this or that task well, but only masters actually use this knowledge, often absolutely automatically—that's why they are masters.

Non-masters generally know about the correct methods of work and thinking but simply forget to apply them, or they're too lazy to do so, because non-automatic S2 reasoning is very labor-intensive compared to S1 intuitions.

This feeling of lostness after starting training (let's look at you in a couple of weeks—will you still be on course?), the inability to reorganize your life to allocate enough time for training (it is known that foreign languages are taught for years at school and university—but they are never really learned. But if you engage properly, for instance, for immigration purposes or for work use, then it all works out!), and the non-use of the results of long training in work projects are usually associated with one reason: misunderstanding why these new extensive knowledge are needed, why use Systems thinking. People live without this Systems thinking and live well, don't they?

The summary here is simple: **if you want to make fewer mistakes in complex
projects,** **then master Systems thinking and then use it in life, all your life, in all projects.** **In**
**some real complex situation, the habit of thinking systemically will save you: you won't make silly mistakes even in those situations that seem very complex to the people around you.** **You will gain a competitive advantage over slower-thinking people (and sometimes even** **AI systems).**

The main mistake in evaluating the applicability of Systems thinking is to consider it an applied method of thinking that works only for some specific type of systems. For instance, systems of only one scale and complexity, say, only for "iron" engineering systems, or only for software, or only for management. No, Systems thinking is a set of thinking techniques from fundamental thinking methods. Fundamental disciplines/theories are called trans-disciplines because they lie "beyond" traditional subject/applied theories/explanations/disciplines that provide methods of working for some specific type of systems, scale of systems, some particular field.

Systems approach concepts are introduced and used in many fundamental disciplines of the intellect stack methods of thinking, starting with physics, which introduces the very concept of "system." These concepts are used for managing attention/provide a convenient system of types for important objects in conditions where the specific project involves multiple applied areas and thereby employs many applied thinking and action methods. In a project, there is engineering work with specific types of systems (roses, steamships, transnational holdings, clientele, cities, countries), requiring the involvement of a huge number of various methods by many organizational roles of creator-agents. Creators can also create (often not from scratch, but all the same—change the embodiment) each other, forming complex creation graphs where the nodes are creators and nodes are linked by the creation relation: "Ivan trained::creation Masha in machining programming, Masha
programmed::creation machine, the machine produced::creation part #3."

Remember that even if you are dealing with roses, the system-rose in the system-garden should be grown by the system-gardener, and the system-gardener also has to be developed by someone—and you immediately have four systems in consideration (if you write them down, you can easily keep them all in mind). Applied methods/practices/activities/work cultures here will be for changing in the physical world:

- roses (e.g., roses need to be tied up—performed by the gardener),
- gardens (e.g., laying out on the terrain, determining where the roses are—performed by the gardener, but gardens cannot be tied up),
- gardeners (e.g., they need to be taught horticulture—performed by those who teach gardeners, but gardeners cannot be tied up or laid out on the terrain),
- those who teach gardeners (e.g., they also need to be taught teaching, so they can teach gardeners, but we didn't even mention that someone has to do this too—that will be the fifth system, and this chain can continue, "teachers for teachers" also have to be trained).

When it's written down, it is easy to understand. Systems thinking helps to slice the world into objects that are convenient to discuss—but more importantly, helps to find important objects. So, in the example with roses, we in fact "automatically” posed a question about the fifth system (who teaches the agents who will teach gardeners), which was out of focus at the start of the discussion. This is a great value: you can easily notice a cockroach in a bowl of soup as it is extra, but you won't notice the lack of salt or roots in the soup—it will just be tasteless, but what is missing, why is it tasteless? Seeing what is forgotten in the project but should be there—the strength of Systems thinking is in this. If in a project they forget to keep attention on the target system in its environment at the time of operation (which is hard, because the system doesn't exist yet!), the project output will be not so much a well-functioning system, but a system that is easy and convenient to make (if you forget that you will have to eat the soup when making it, you might not salt it, not put roots in it—this is "extra work," so it’s easy to forget about it). Systems thinking will surely correct this, remind you of what is forgotten. Nine out of ten times it will be trivial, and the tenth time—it will save the project.

Managing attention can be quite difficult even in a simple project, where one person plays multiple roles and manages their own attention, distributing it across objects from several applied areas that may be in this project. A wheat field and agronomy, a farm team and enterprise management, marketing as engineering the client base, financial engineering for organizing investments in the farm, engineering of cyber-physical systems for an agro-robot—suddenly, the "simple" project is not so simple. Systems thinking, at a minimum, allows you to track and organize thinking to handle keeping the entire project's scope and diversity in mind (and records in a computer to help the mind!).

A question like "how can I evaluate the applicability of Systems thinking for my specific task/problem" precisely shows this misunderstanding of the difference between fundamental knowledge and applied knowledge. Let's replace "Systems thinking" with "attention management" and ask again: "how to assess the applicability of attention management in my specific task/problem"? It seems like no one would say that, as it makes no sense, because managing attention is always necessary, in any task/problem. No question of "applicability" arises here. Similarly, no one questions the applicability of logic, because fantasizing in reasoning at work is no good, logic must be employed in all reasoning. Concepts of Systems approach should be applied (i.e., assigning the objects of the project types of Systems thinking) the same way: always, like logic, like managing attention! Essentially, this is attention management: conceptual (directed by the types of the meta-meta-model) attention management. Think this way during the project, constantly directing your attention to objects indicated by the types from the Systems thinking course. You are currently studying this course, although we have not yet reached the actual concepts of Systems thinking; they will be explained in the next section.

Our Systems thinking course aims to use the learning outcomes in projects, so the course is engineering-focused (goal: changing the world, even if it is about changing people—it is still engineering). It is not a course on the history of Systems thinking, which is why we do not provide detailed descriptions of General Systems Theory, do not quote Bertalanffy, do not elaborate much on the systems theories of other thinkers of the past century, nor do we discuss much the reasons for the failure of cybernetics as almost synonymous with Systems science. The course discusses what to think about when doing something. But the course does not discuss how exactly to do something applied: what applied methods to use for project tasks, what roles to take in the project.

The "Systems Thinking" course is not a course on methodology, Systems engineering, personal engineering, organizational engineering (management). These will be other, subsequent courses. In our course, we only teach thinking about the world in terms of systems. Everything not related to the concepts of the Systems approach from fundamental disciplines of the intellect stack thinking methods remains outside our course. For example, we do not elaborate on decision theory from rationality, do not provide basics of rhetoric. The course also does not address applied work methods in various fields (military affairs, medicine, genetic engineering, rocket science, AI agent creation, software engineering, horticulture). The material of our course is substantial enough without it.

Systems thinking turns out to be practical/cultural/activity-based/engineering/stylish and applicable everywhere: it enhances your intellect in any projects, not just projects of a certain type. This is applied thinking of orthodontics or drilling in viscous soils that is applicable only to a narrow class of tasks. Systems thinking cannot be compared in this regard to applied thinking methods that allow reasoning about objects in projects of a certain class, in certain fields. With Systems thinking, you think systemically in all projects, including situations of switching from project to project, formulating/defining a new task/problem, organizing a new project, dealing with a new field for you.

The Systems thinking course is a semester-long university course (5 European credits, about 30 hours of learning time per credit^[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit\_(education)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_(education))
and
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European\_Credit\_Transfer\_and\_Accumulation\_System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Credit_Transfer_and_Accumulation_System)]).
This means allocating 2–3 hours a day for 20–30 days to read the course material and complete course tasks, and another 2–3 hours for ten-twenty days will be spent reading additional literature, meeting with the instructor (if you choose this format), working on the project. In reality, this means restructuring your daily routine.

Avoid taking several courses "mixed together." Courses are designed for sequential completion. To avoid forgetting the material, the courses include repetition. There are also blocks with answers to questions in the courses—if you have a question, you will likely find the answer either within a few pages of the current course or in the next course. Thus, our course's materials will be repeated in the courses "Methodology," "Systems Engineering," "Personal Engineering," "Systems Management." After completing all these courses, many explanations in the Systems thinking course will become clearer. So we recommend not getting stuck on one unclear piece of our course for too long; just later go through the entire sequence of courses again, definitely with doing homework. Repeat: do the suggested modeling during work hours, as it concerns using the thinking proposed in the course in work projects—so work on, think about work questions during work hours, even if it’s an assignment from our course.