---
title: Implementation, Description, and Documentation of the System
---

In a systems approach, it is very important to be **adequate** in thinking: to understand whether we are talking about the physical reality of our world, tied to it, or just fantasizing about some abstract world of ideas that may not correspond to reality. If we want to reliably change the physical world according to our plans, if we are talking about human activity, then we need to somehow tie all our reasoning to the physical world, ultimately deal with the physical reality^[In philosophy, this tying of facts to reality is described as grounding, <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/grounding/>].

The adequacy of systems thinking is ensured by the fact that when we talk about a system, we mean the **implementation of the system** (system realization—the same root as real, literally it is about existence in reality), usually **at the moment of operation**, when the system is working/functioning, interacting with the surrounding world.

A system is always understood as a specific implementation of the system in the physical world—a unique, individual physical object. For example, this is the company Apple (all its buildings, structures, and employees at the moment they work there), fuel pump with serial number #12345, installed on the engine #5678, the performance (work of the dancers) of the dance "Barynya" on the stage of the Ust-Uryupinsk theater on the evening of October 24, 2029 (the implementation of the system in the future suits us perfectly).

How do we know that a specific implemented system exists in the physical world? We will consider that in the physical world there are (including in the present, past, and future—time does not matter here!) only those objects that occupy some place, **volume** of some convoluted shape **in** **our** **space-time**, accepting Einstein's idea of the existence of the physical world in four-dimensional space-time. There is a piece of space-time that we call **system** and distinguish with our attention from its **environment**, while the system has a **boundary** passing through space and time. Since this involves space-time, it doesn’t matter where in space (here or in a neighboring galaxy) and doesn’t matter where in time (for example, the system will exist for five minutes but a hundred years from "now").

Thus, a specific system has some extent in space (that is, shape—size, length, width, height, radius) and in time (that is, there is a moment when it began to exist and a moment when it will cease to exist).

And this system also has changing **states**. Systems change as they interact with surrounding systems, which are also in the physical world, and within them, the interacting subsystems are also changing. For example, "door::system is open", "door::system is closed", "door::system is broken down"—these are all different states of the door. States are extremely important since different methods can lead to different states of systems. For example, "open door number four at 3:15 PM on March 24"::work can change door number four from the state "door is closed" to the state "door is open" (for example, "open with a key, turn the handle and push with a hand"::"method of work"), or "door is broken down" (for example, "kick hard in the lock area"::"method of work").

A systems view of the world is physically/realistic. The concept of "system" comes from physics^[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Physical_system]. Physics selects mathematical objects to express the properties of objects in the surrounding physical world, which behave similarly in thought experiments. Semantics is a transdiscipline that connects physics with its physical objects (objects), concepts as mathematical/ideal objects, and signs as patterns on some medium, which designate objects and concepts (signs are studied by the discipline of semiotics). You have already studied the basics of semantics in the course "Rational Work"; in our course "Systems Thinking" the application of semantics to the systems approach will be revealed, and in the course "Intellect-Stack" much more detail will be given about semantics, physics, mathematics, semiotics and their connections.

Thus, we clearly distinguish (and this distinction is the subject of study of the transdiscipline of semantics):

-   **Implementation of the system** (system realization), occupying volume in the physical space-time as the subject of physics.
-   **Description of the system** (system definition, often also called system definitions, do not confuse with "dictionary definitions"!) as an ideal/mathematical/mental/abstract/conceptual object. The behavior of descriptions as ideal objects is studied by mathematics.
-   **Document with a system description**, as the expression of the system description on a physical medium. Methods of expression (patterns on a physical medium) are studied by semiotics, the "science of signs."

In the physical world, there are some non-zero size sections of space, while mathematics deals with mathematical points, and semiotics deals with patterns on a medium, signs/symbols. Of course, there are distributed representations, which are studied in methods of representation learning (we translate learning in AI methods as cognition). But we will not deal with how intuitive fast thinking S1 is arranged, which uses distributed representations. We will work with local/symbolic/symbolic/sign representations, which are dealt with by slow thinking S2. In distributed representations, it is very difficult to find errors; they are not localized in the literal sense of the word. But it is much easier to find errors in symbolic representations. Therefore, engineering tasks are more reliably solved in compact local representations with a few signs, rather than in distributed representations (for example, neural networks—living in human brains or computer systems in AI).

The behaviors of mathematical objects and their corresponding physical objects always differ, which is why physics, in the course of its development, replaces some mathematical representations with others, which behave more similarly to how physical objects behave. For example, the sum of the angles of a triangle near Earth is slightly more than 180° not even because of the Earth's roundness, but because of the curvature of space-time by the Earth's mass. Therefore, GPS navigation cannot be realized if one relies on Euclidean geometry in the physical calculations of an engineering project. Thus, physics replaced Euclidean geometry with Riemannian geometry in the theory of relativity.

Traditionally, the correspondence of descriptions as ideal/mathematical objects/concepts, expressed/presented by some patterns/patterns/templates/resemblance on some physical objects (documents) and the represented/represented by them other (described) physical objects/systems is dealt with by semantics. However, semantics can also deal with the description of descriptions (for example, you can describe the mathematical language in which you describe a physical object). But this chain of descriptions always rests on the description of real physical objects, otherwise, it will be impossible to agree on what all these descriptions mean; without grounding, you can’t work with descriptions.

Semantics is sometimes considered a part of computer science alongside algorithmics; more on this can be learned, for example, from David Deutsch's book "The Beginning of Infinity. Explanations That Transform the World"^[<https://www.litres.ru/devid-doych/nachalo-beskonechnosti-obyasneniya-kotorye-menyaut-mir/>], where he discusses the relationships between physics, mathematics, and computer science. More explanations can be found in the course "Intellect-Stack." **In systems thinking, it is essential that all descriptions in the world are, in the end, descriptions of systems, as we represent the entire physical world as implementations of various interacting systems.** The reservation "in the end" is if you consider that sometimes one description describes another description.

The descriptions themselves as mental/ideal/conceptual/mathematical/abstract objects have no place in the real world. One cannot say that the mathematical/mental object "number 300", defining the height in meters (implementation) of the system "Eiffel Tower", exists somewhere in the real world and has its own length-width-height. If you point to this "number 300" and say that it exists and has its own volume, you will not point to the number itself but to a **document** as the **information carrier**, which by its patterns/forms as material forms (patterns of paint particles, or transparency of the material, or somehow else) encodes this number. Thus, the place in the physical world is not occupied by "300" as a number, not part of the description of the Eiffel Tower (the number 300 describes the Eiffel Tower), but by the material object piece of **documentation** (system description as opposed to system definition) of the Eiffel Tower, that is, the information/document carrier with the information/description recorded on it. **A document—a** **abstract/ideal/mathematical/concept/conceptual** **description of the system, recorded on** **some** **physical** **information carrier.** **One or several documents are usually called the system documentation.**

In the documentation, patterns on the carrier encode concepts/concepts/mathematical/abstract objects, representing some (ultimately, because sometimes there are descriptions of descriptions) different properties of physical objects. Again and again, in different words, we repeat this trinity: sign, concept, referent.

In systems thinking, you will need confident knowledge of the basics of semantics (for example, semantics is taught in the course "Rational Work"). Woe to you if you poorly understand this material and confuse a car as a target system and a photograph of a car as a document-carrier of the description of this car. The photograph is material, but its materiality is important only as the possibility to carry the description of the physical object-car, the materiality of information carriers should not confuse us—this is not the materiality of the implementation of the depicted/described/documented system! **A common mistake is to consider the target system as some document with a system description.** If you are not interested in the content of the document (you are a printing house, or a courier, or a material archive: they do not care about the content, the information, only the physical form of the document), you can consider the document or even the entire documentation as the target system. If you are interested in what is described in the document, then the target system is definitely not that document; you are concerned with the description, not the document itself. So, look for what is described in the document and do not get distracted by the document itself!

The screen or paper of a photograph or even the computer memory with the photograph file is information carriers, not the "photograph" itself as information on it! Tearing a paper photograph (documentation of the photographed person::system) does not tear the person depicted in the photograph (implementation of the system), nor does it even tear the image of the person on that photograph (system description), because it may remain in hundreds of other physical and electronic carriers. It's tearing a piece of paper, not the image or the person! Punishment for "burning the flag" is punishment for forbidden thoughts, not for property damage!

Absolutely the same action—turning off the screen with the photograph or deleting the photograph file (this is not as symbolic as tearing a paper photograph, but in essence, it is the same.
Abstract/mathematical/conceptual/concept objects do not burn, representing them on carriers is usually easy to copy, and the destruction of a document, even electronic—this is not the destruction of the object described by the document, and often not even the disappearance of the documented description, available in many copies of the document). The concept/concept/mathematical object "number 1" in the grand scheme does not even depend on the font and other display features, it is abstract, it can be expressed in many ways, many renditions of signs. And we remember that there are no concepts in the physical world; they are abstract/mathematical. Information models of systems (once upon a time they were called designs) are abstract/ideal/conceptual; they are documented in many copies and describe the implementation of a system, i.e., the physical world. The information engineering model of the spaceport, sending people on rockets to Mars, is an explanation of a possible physical world (since we are talking about a possible future).

**System descriptions** are easy to distinguish from system implementations and system documents—they don’t occupy space in the physical world, they don’t have volume and coordinates in this world, they are **abstract/**“ideal”/immaterial/mathematical/conceptual as opposed to material/physical/implemented. Systems and system documents (documents about systems) are material, they occupy space in the physical world, but we do not confuse systems and documents with system descriptions.

People ultimately are interested in system implementations (houses, airplanes, skill of the manager, game session, money), and system descriptions and documentation (information models, papers with writings, images on the screen) interest them precisely to the extent that without them the implementation of the system is difficult to make, especially when it comes to systems created by many people:

-   Documentation is external memory, "exo-cortex." We do not trust the biological brain; we trust what is written on some more stable carrier. Documentation is always in exo-cortex, not in neocortex (cerebral cortex). For AI agents, documentation can be with neural network weights, but it is quite copiable and stable over time.
-   Documentation carries models (only the important in the description). This is already the result of thinking: it says not "everything" (which is impossible to discuss) about the system, but only "something important" (which can be discussed, checked for errors, adopted as a guideline for actions to change the physical world, and not just change of descriptions: changes to descriptions on carriers are not changes to the physical world, unless you are a printer or a computer monitor manufacturer).
-   A designer from a connectionist/neural network (in the human brain or AI agent) model prepares a symbolic model of the system and places it on an external carrier ("exo-cortex") so that the production technologist can prepare a fabrication program considering the specific equipment of the production platform/factory. Division of labor: different agents think about the system’s creation, so agents need to somehow transfer the results of their thinking. This is done through system documentation, though today more often **documentation is computer models, and not paper documents, and documents in this case are not transferred/transported, but access is gained to them.**

Distinction for the implementation of the system (physical), description (non-physical), documentation (physical as an information carrier, this is not the described system) is necessary, among other things, to prevent common mistakes of people who play the roles of design engineers in system creation projects:

-   When people don’t even think about creating a system but are writing another "concept." It is necessary to check whether the concept describes something existing in reality and not just outlines the creation of documentation while avoiding the description of the system's implementation. For example, "the concept of regional development": is this utopia? What are the tools for implementing the concept? Because "region" is an entirely material object. Who and what should do (perform works, having resources and authority to dispose of resources) to transfer the region from the state "was" to "became" according to the concept? Does the concept accurately describe the physical object "region," which will exist in the future?
-   When developers of project documentation believe that their target system is the documentation. Engineers from the design bureau or the project institute often confuse the implementation of the system when it is already operational with the information model of such a system, which they "imagined" without a chance for its implementation/realization/construction. No, the target system is always the implementation of the system; without the implementation of the system, it is not worth starting its description (result of thinking, mental object), documenting this description (resulting in outputting the description to an external stable information carrier). Without the intent to create a system, it is about "artistic descriptions," there can be any mistakes, and there won’t even be a desire to check them. The designer should be asked what will be the result of his work. If the designer, for instance, answers "a building," then everything is OK. If such a designer answers "an information model of a building"—sound the alarm because the designer's thought clearly does not extend to the implementation of the system, limited by the description and documentation.
-   Developers of source code programs (this is the description of the system's implementation) also believe that their responsibilities end when they submit the documentation (source code with any number of errors) to the version control system (carrier—external computer memory storing the version). No, their target system should be—a working program (changing its state! Program variables change their state in computer memory! This is a physical process!), and not the source code on any of its carriers. Furthermore, we need to check whether it's a just working program or a working program together with people who can perform useful work with this program—then it will also be necessary to consider the "soft skills in people's minds," which also need to be developed and then produced (someone must be concerned with the skill of the people working with the program's implementation at the moment the program is operational, not its source code).
-   A manager who developed an action plan for some project (description of works, existing as the project documentation in project management software). The implementation of a system for a project (set of works) will be an organization with the necessary resources and authority, performing works according to the plan, not the plan itself. Moreover, the target system is likely to be the system obtained in the course of these project works, not the organization conducting the works! The plan's author should primarily think about the system obtained as a result of the plan's execution!
-   ... and such errors of "description instead of implementation," related to the inability or even unwillingness of designers to be responsible for changing the physical world for the better, not just articulating ideas about such changes, are numerous. One must always pay attention to the difference between a system, its description, and its documentation. In particular, if it is about the **work of an analyst versus the work of an engineer**, there is a greater chance to obtain a "description" (analytical report, very rarely—some "recommendations," not even included in the analytical report but presented separately) as the final result without "changing the physical world." Engineers change the world; analysts (by definition!) do not change the world. It is necessary to check if there is "synthetic" besides "analytics" in the project; the implementation needs to look for him. **If a project ultimately does not change the physical world, then such a project may not be done at all since nothing will change in the world!** **Or do it as artistic creativity, write off costs under the "entertainment" expense item.**

The result of the work of an atomic power plant designer ultimately is the implementation of a functioning atomic power plant, not the description of the atomic power plant, even documented in the form of an information model of the atomic power plant in dozens of computers. The result of a choreographer's work is ultimately the performance of a dancer (performed at a specific point in time and space in the universe), not the description of the choreography (sequence of movements) in the dancers' heads