---
title: 'How to Negotiate: Be Specific, Not General'
---

If one person mentions the President of the United States and another mentions Donald Trump, are they referring to the same person? And if other people mention the President of the United States and George Washington – are they referring to the same person that the person in the previous sentence was referring to?

In engineering, strict logic is needed for such reasoning about whether different descriptions refer to the same object. The pump P-101 described by one person on a piping diagram and the PDR-15-NSH-12 pump described by another person in the installation specification – are they the same pump? And the PDR-15-NSH-12 pump installed in the turbine hall with serial number RKS456/4 – how does it relate to the first two? How to describe this "in a computer" so as not to confuse oneself and not confuse others?

Even Descartes (1596-1650) wondered: how can we understand that people are talking about the same object if they see it in very different ways (i.e., classify it into very different categories)? For example, one engineer talks about a high-performance system, the other about an explosive one, the manager about a profitable one, and the financier about a cheap one? How can we understand that they are talking about the same system? Descartes' answer to such questions is still used today^[This story and many other aspects of this section are detailed in Chris Partridge's book "Business Objects: Re-Engineering for Re-Use", <https://disk.yandex.ru/i/2SgjvILB3PqJEZ>]: if the **places** **in** **physical** **space-time/extents** of two objects coincide (the forms of the objects and their location in space-time coincide), then it is the same object. Regardless of the primary or secondary characteristics, properties, and parts that different people saw in the object/system, or for what applications this object/system is needed. The names of those places in space-time that different people talk about with different subjects of interest in a given situation do not matter. If it's about the same place in space-time, then it's about the same system embodiment. If I talk about food, you talk about an apple, she talks about a commodity, he talks about a green physical body weighing 150 grams, and we all point to the same place/volume/form/extent in space-time/physical world, then it's the same object. If someone points in the physical world/space-time at a butterfly with wings and says "butterfly", and someone else points at an object changing over time and moving in space from egg-caterpillar-chrysalis-butterfly-with-wings and says "butterfly", then these two people have a chance to understand each other, even if they initially couldn't agree because of confusion in words/terms.

Importantly, the "move towards understanding" here is to specific details (system embodiment, physical world), not to "definitions" (i.e., categorizing objects by their kind – "Aristotelian definition", "as in dictionaries", as in mathematics textbooks). **Issuing definitions,** **as well as** **demanding definitions,** **usually clouds understanding in complex situations.** **Only** **examples** **of system embodiments in** **the physical** **world,** **"grounding" –** **such examples end all term disputes.**

If a glossary was given in this systems thinking course, and therein a set of definitions, understanding the material would deteriorate: the formality of the presentation would increase, and the connection with the physical world would worsen. In our course, in its last section "Instead of a Glossary: The Ontology of the Third Generation Systems Approach," we proposed another way to solve the problem of compactly describing a multitude of related concepts of the systems approach. If you really want to have a glossary, try instead of reading that glossary to read this section, and note: it unfolds into a rather long text if you refer to the literature listed there (dozens of quite large source texts).

If we do not require that all reasoning, all descriptions of systems that people make, are ultimately tied to system embodiments, we would not have the opportunity to verify whether people are talking about the same thing or different things. Moreover, there would be huge problems with verifying whether people are talking about the real world or expressing good wishes, or just fantasizing, or even consciously avoiding bringing their thoughts to reality. Emphasis on the fact that the description and documentation of the system concern the embodiment of the system in the physical world (and not something abstract that allows fantasies) allows to some extent ignoring the differences in terminology used by people. Ultimately, it is always possible to verify whether people designate the same concept with different terms or different ones: even if we are talking about abstract concepts, it is always possible to point to examples from the real world that specify these abstract concepts.

This does not mean abandoning descriptions: descriptions are needed to transfer knowledge about one place in the physical world (system embodiment) to multiple such places (to classes of systems). Descriptions of systems support abstract thinking, but **ultimately everything is decided by the activity** **of changing the world, that is, the activity of** **embodiment/manufacture/implementation** **of the system in the real/physical** **world.** Description helps to focus on important considerations regarding the physical world, but nothing more. The physical world is paramount, systems thinking keeps the focus on it, and for this, systems thinking uses the concept of system embodiment.