---
title: Holes
---

The object "hole" in language is defined as something non-existent, "a gap." In a bagel, the hole is the place where there is no dough. But in the engineering world, a hole/gap/cavity quite exists as a distinct concrete object in the physical world: it can be made (drilled), it can be lined with some kind of coating. A well is a hole in the ground; oilmen often call it a "hole" in slang: it is valuable precisely because there is nothing in the well, so oil or gas can be pumped through it. A "passage" (for example, a cable passage^[[https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Кабельная\_проходка](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Кабельная_проходка)]) is a device with a hole through which some other engineering object can pass (in a cable passage, it’s a cable; in a roofing passage, it can be a cable, pipe, antenna, etc.).

If you remember that a hole occupies a certain volume, a certain place in space-time, then you can give it a name (engineers do this), and discuss some technological operations with it—manufacturing, accounting, inspection, repair, "tuning". Moreover, this is a good criterion for determining whether such a "gap" should be given a name: if there is some operation (work according to some method, leading to a change of state) with such a "gap," then for accounting and checking the state of the "gap" after such an operation, it is better if the "gap" has a separate name.

A hole/gap/cavity occupies a place in space-time, therefore, it exists in the physical world. The "working cavity" in a compressor is also a "hole," the working space in a pipeline is also a "hole." It is easy to think of them by imagining this space filled with molecules of gas or liquid or even a vacuum: physical matter is not important here. What is important is how to think about it, and we need to think about places in the physical world, regions/volumes of space/time.

An intermission is a part (in time) of a concert or performance when the performance is absent. You can reason about an intermission just like about engineering holes, but this will not be a spatial part, but a temporal part of the performance or concert as a material object, an embodiment of the system. The "culmination of the performance" can also be represented as a quite material part: this is a temporal (in time) part of the performance, where the maximum emotional intensity is reached. On the other hand, you can consider that this part takes an insignificant amount of time, and then the "culmination of the performance" will be an event—and the temporal parts will be important before and after this event.

How to think about intermission or culmination as temporal parts of the performance? These will be all the items of the performance (all the molecules of the items making up the performance—actors, props, audience) at some time interval.

You can also deal with strange objects that need to be accounted for by name (since you need to perform some actions with them), but which are difficult to isolate as separate from the physical object—for example, welds. A weld needs to be designed, made, and then regularly checked. This means that a weld instance must have an individual name; it is a specific physical object occupying a place in the physical world. If you understand that a weld is just a place in space (and time!), then there are no problems in thinking about such an object: it is the same part of the system as the pipe itself or the gear or the hole. They can have their parts (although the weld has molecules, and the hole has no molecules, but there is space that molecules could occupy!), they are parts of other material objects, they can have descriptions.

This somewhat contradicts the notion of a "configuration of matter resistant to the destructive action of time" as a system in physics. For example, if looking at a candle flame, researcher Karl Friston notes the impossibility of indicating the boundary of the system, since there is some chaotic exchange of molecules with the environment. But if you take an engineer, then for him "flame" is quite an object, the state of which can be measured (say, measure the temperature in the center of the flame and at its conditional boundary). And this flame the engineer will define by its spatial form in the environment and the need to perform some operations with this form: for the engineer, there will be the same reasoning as with a "hole." And the flame will be quite stable for him, and the weld with its blurry boundary between the weld itself and the material at the molecular level will be even more stable.

You can further deal with similar changes of states and objects that change state during an instantaneous/simple event or a complex event that takes some time—depending on the consideration. For example, in 3D printing of rocket bodies^[<https://www.relativityspace.com/>] you can easily imagine a rocket body consisting of a continuous "weld"—in fact, it is a continuous deposition of metal. It is important to understand that the **time scale of consideration**/the scale of the temporal part of the system also matters. On a large timescale, "there was no shell—now it is," and on a small timescale, "we added one layer of metal to the shell, and so thousands and thousands of times." And it is important not so much the "objects," perceived as "usual solid objects," but the occupied space-time within some system boundaries. In time, such system boundaries (or system states) are **events**, in space—**form/place**. **Events and forms/places are boundaries of the system or states of the system.**