---
title: Behavior is not a system
---

**It is bad to consider behavior and the system as the same object —**
**you will find it extremely difficult to describe the behavior of the behavior: "the state of dance during the dance by the method of dance" —** **you will get confused right away.** **If you have chosen a verb or verbal noun as a system ("dance", "life", "rest"), it will generate** **both** **multiple interpretations and difficulty describing "process states" (not system states) —** **therefore, we will consider such a choice an error, no matter how you refer to works on 4D** **extensionism and declare,** **that "systems and processes occupy the same place in space-time, therefore they are the same."** **Formally, yes, the same. But due to the peculiarities of language and communication, you will not be able to** **clearly** **discuss such processes-systems,** **clearly describe/model,** **so such choices** **"process-is-system"** **will be a mistake.**

We will distinguish between systems and the behavior of systems but, to clarify the boundaries of the system and the behavior of systems, we will still use 4D extensionism, describing the behavior simply by listing the things/physical bodies interacting with the change of their states. The method::behavior of eliminating a draft during ventilation will be described through the changes in the state of the door: first, the door will be in the state "door open", then the state "door closed". If it is necessary to understand what happened, we will list the objects involved in the state changes (foot and door, key and door, gust of wind and door). Various participants (relationship participate) in "behavior" items determine different types/classes of the method/process/practice/style::behavior of stopping drafts by "closing the door"::"class method of stopping drafts". For example, "stopping drafts"::method::behavior consists of smaller methods "identify the cause", "eliminate the cause, close the door", "check that there is no more draft", "declare to those present that there is no more draft".

The use of "over-" and "under-" terminology for methods/practices can be used in two ways:

- As a temporal part of the situation of applying some work method (here exactly that — and we used the words "smaller method" instead of "sub-method" when describing the techniques/actions of closing the door)
- As alternative classes/types of methods::type (for example, stopping drafts while ventilating by closing the door, vs. stopping drafts by closing the window — and other objects will already be listed there, including not the door but the window). In our course, we prefer to speak here of "type" or "class" (a reference to genus-species relationships), for example: "type of labor", "type of activity", "type of culture", to show different types/classes classified by the method/labor/culture::type. Although in this case, it is possible to talk about the specialization relationship (a method of preventing drafts specializes into stopping drafts by closing the door and stopping drafts by closing the window).

So when we talk about "sub-methods"/"sub-practices", be more attentive to which hierarchy the reference goes to. Classification, specialization, and part-whole relationships are very different relationships, be careful.

All these considerations of system states are needed for detailed (often — collective) discussion of some behavior as the transition of the system from one state to another.

Thus, an engineer thinking about dancing::behavior as requiring a set of objects existing in their mutual changes ("dance performance"), may also consider the source of air vibrations, and include a player (a smartphone as a player) and an audio system (the role of the audio system can be played by either stationary amplifiers and speakers, or portable acoustics, or a live rock band with all its equipment) in the performance.

And you will also need to add spectators to the dance performance (since dancers like to say that "without spectators — it's just movements, not a dance"). Note that a dance::style or dance::performance, or dance::work — it's unclear, dancers themselves find it very difficult to talk about dances. This is one of the reasons why it's hard to learn how to dance: you are just poorly explained what to do!).

Note that adding spectators to the performance (literally: spectators as a subsystem::"physical part of the system" performance::system) — is not an obvious mental step. For example, if two dancers dance with each other, that's enough for dancing; they are "spectators" for each other (spectators are roles, not some separate objects). Thus, spectators and dancers are participants (a participation relationship, a specialization of the "part-whole" relationship) of the dance performance, and here arises a fairly rich set of objects for discussing the performance situation. We can reason about the dancing of the artists more precisely, relating to physical objects, physical space-time.

Dancing of a dancer — is a process/action/activity, but when we add other objects to the dancer, and it becomes a "dance performance"::system (a set of subsystems, not "dancing process", as a lot happens during the performance besides just dancing::behavior of the dancer::system), thinking about both the dancer and the performance with his participation can already be roughly similar to a "machine", "car", "hole". Specifying what "dancing" is (concretizing/grounding) can be done by giving examples of this behavior/process embodiment in the dancer in different performances, rather than referring to dictionary definitions of the term "dancing" or "artistic performance". Referring to definitions leads to lengthy and fruitless "debates on terms", avoid such disputes. Clarify meanings through grounding.

So, even behaviors can be thought of more or less like whole objects (processes) consisting of object-parts (sub-processes), and this greatly economizes thinking.

For dance performance (within which there is "dancing of dancers/artists"::behavior just like within a car there is "engine work"::behavior, "wheel rotation"::behavior), thus, as with any other material/physical system embodiment, it can be conditionally "knocked", it can be conditionally "loaded into a cart", it can be conditionally "pointed at" — just these actions take place with a set of physical objects participating in the performance as its parts.

The conditionality of "knocking" or "loading into a cart" or "pointing at a place in space-time" lies in the fact that physical objects in systems can be inaccessible, too small, too hot for these actions, but this is irrelevant. These metaphors simply imply that we are talking about the physical world, discussing something embodied (occupying specific space-time, having shape and coordinates in space-time), and not abstract/ideal/informational/mathematical/mental.

However, when we are talking not about the dance performance as a whole, but about the dancer's dancing within this performance, then you can knock on the dancer, and the dancing itself — will be a change/process/behavior, not a changing system. The dancer will change and something outside the dancer as a system (interactions, mutual changes are always happening) — the state of the air carrying music to the dancer as input information, the state of the spectators as a result of changes caused by the dancing. But if you want to consider all the interacting objects together — assemble a new system from them, for example, gather dancers, premises, music, player, and speakers, as well as spectators into a "dance performance"::system. To discuss in detail the "rotation of the wheels" as behavior of the wheels in a car, add the road, add the engine driving the wheels, add the car with its weight — you get a "car ride" roughly by the same logic as a "dance performance". The ride can already be considered a system within which various processes occur. But you cannot knock on the "rotation of the wheels" as actual behavior, unless you add objects. You will knock just on the wheel::system, which behaves in some way (rotates in this case). Remember: behavior always belongs to a system, and the behavior itself is not a system, but rather the behavior of the system (not even a property, just the behavior of the system, the change of states of the system)! By pointing to a system, you point to the system along with its behavior, but there is no such thing as a non-behaving system, as all ready-made systems operate, function, provide services, influence the environment, change within themselves — that is, **systems always participate in processes, always behave externally, somehow change their environment**.

The conditionality of representing such systems as "a ride", "a play session", "an access session" as a set of some subsystems in certain states is also in the fact that it is difficult to imagine how you "knock" on all these interacting subsystems simultaneously, and also during their continuous changes while interacting. Some "communication session" — is the interaction of servers and communication lines in different countries, and the physical configuration there continuously changes: when some physical cable breaks, the communication session continues to exist, and the interaction of servers simply starts occurring through another physical cable or even through a laser beam!

And still, it's convenient thinking about such "scattered in space" systems, you just need to understand that all these various changing physical objects exist in the physical world, these are not descriptions::"mental object" and not documentation::"description on a physical carrier", and not actual changes/behaviors/processes. Processes as changes of systems are quite physical, the systems as separate changing objects participating in them (participate in processes, participate in changes, "carry out changes", for example, "carry out service::behavior").

Say, we easily call a "dance performance" (like any "event") a "system", and the leading process/change there will be — dancers' dancing, and also providing music (musicians playing music, or the speakers playing connected to a player, and through Bluetooth — always remember there are alternatives that can be considered separately). Dancing — no, we won't call it a system, leaving it as the dancer's behavior. The system performing some behavior (work, function, service, practice) of dancing remains the dancer, and dancing becomes the behavior (work, service, practice, method, way, function — features of using different terms with varying meanings in system thinking will be discussed later) of the dancers, not the performance. The performance does not dance! It entertains, pleases, makes money, whatever, but dancers dance in it, they are inside the performance, part of it. **Parts of the system have certain properties/characteristics and** **behavior, while the whole** **has other properties/characteristics and** **behavior.** This appearance of new properties and new behavior in the system relative to its parts, is called **emergent property/emergence**.

Systems always, during their existence (when they are ready and used, not when they are created and developed), produce some changes in the surrounding world (that is, they behave externally, participate in a process) and change themselves in the course of these changes. Therefore, the dancer — dances in the course of their work, the resting — rests, the living agent — lives. How to talk about this? To speak precisely, it is necessary to somehow collect a supersystem for the changing objects — and discuss the behavior of some system as a part of its supersystem.

What mistakes are there? For example, to say that the dancer dances during/in the dance, and not in the course/of the dance performance. You won’t be able to clearly say what the "dance" consists of (is it the performance in general? Only the dancer's dancing, i.e., the change in some rhythm of the dancer's poses?), everyone will understand you differently. But you can easily agree on the "dance performance" and the dancer with his dancing during this performance, avoiding ambiguity in defining the dance as a separate system. To say that the resting rests during the rest, the living lives during life — it will also be unclear, as intuitively, it is not clear what things make up "rest" and what things make up "life." Therefore, the situations of resting and living will need to be carefully specified, caution when translating processes into systems along the 4D extensionism line, you will have to present supersystems for systems whose behavior you are discussing, and also might be asked about the change of the state of state changes (that is, changes in behavior states — it will be very difficult to answer this question, but if there is a system — there will be its behavior, if the behavior is called a system, they will ask about its behavior, "behavior of behavior").

You can "knock" on the enterprise::system during its activity::behavior. But you are unlikely to knock "on the activity of the enterprise", you will have to present all the objects affected by the enterprise in the external world during changes — and then this "enterprise activity" will probably be some other object, with different properties (as "dancer's dancing" became completely different when it was included in the "dance performance"). Although the activity of an enterprise is much more complex than dancing, but essentially not much different from it, during this activity people, equipment, buildings, and structures, raw materials, and semi-finished products interact. You can knock on them. The enterprise exists in our world. Despite the fact that processes continuously occur within it, and it participates in processes in external environments, you can work with it as a "thing", although consisting of many other things involved in its activity::behavior.

The systems of an enterprise (**roles**, performing **methods/processes**^[Following ISO 29148, we recommend not saying "business processes" but "organizational processes"**work**, opposed to **services/units**, performing some **services/work**) when understanding this enterprise as a set of physical objects (buildings, materials, equipment, and even people) playing some role in it, become quite "physical", non-abstract, having spatial-temporal extent. All objects making up the enterprise are easy to imagine, easy to find by their descriptions, and easy to describe. To start, you just need to list the physical objects involved in the process — and it will immediately become clear whether you understand the process in the same way as others in the enterprise. But you cannot "define", you cannot define processes through assigning them to some classes of operations/procedures, this will only lead to disputes about terms. And you cannot consider the procedures of processes themselves: the regulations only describe the process! You cannot "knock" on a description-procedure (which is presented on a screen, or paper, or even in computer memory), but you can knock on a procedure document, process documentation. And this knocks on a completely different object than the process/work defined by the procedure. Knocking on a person and knocking on a person's photo — is knocking on different items! You can knock on a document, but you cannot knock on the process described by the document — you will be knocking on the system that performs the process.

We will often use the example of the system behavior of a dancing dancer — a dancer (as will be shown later in the course) is not as trivially broken down into parts as a pump or a bicycle. But dance performances with dancers' dancing are still much simpler than an enterprise with its workers' work, so thinking about dances is easier than about an enterprise. And it's not in vain that one of the classic (published in 1999) books by Peter Senge on system thinking for enterprises is called "The Dance of Change"^[<https://www.ozon.ru/context/detail/id/1378492/>].

Another example — intelligence, as a system implemented by the brain or computer apparatus. Its behavior — thinking. You cannot "knock" on thinking, but on intelligence (we understand it's part of the material system-computer) — quite, even if we don't know exactly which parts (neurons and other brain cells — which exactly, transistors of a classical computer) perform thinking::behavior.

If we talk about a single object-instance that needs to be made and for this to create an organization — this is a good system choice. An event (in our case — "dance performance" is such a micro-event, and a dance party — simply an event, dance festival — a large event, they are "held", "conducted") — is a normal system choice. It's clear how to think about it. But still, you will have to define what the event does with its environment and what is part of the event and what is part of the environment.

If it is a routine "work process"/method, or "physical process"/function ("water flows", "the room is cleaned", "the company works — and it goes from dawn to dusk, endlessly"), that is, talking not about something being created, but a method/culture/"work process"/activity, then it is a bad system choice, negotiating about such a "system" will be extremely difficult, formally everything will be correct, but the project will suffer from such a system choice.

Again: an event — OK as a created and developed system (as well as a session game, a deal, and other non-standard not very similar to a detail or factory objects, and for them, it's clear how to describe and think about them as systems), but a work method or work — not a system, but behavior of some system (a method is learned, a method is taught, a method is "set up", but not "created as a method instance" or "released is small batches". Compare: creating five game sessions sounds good, this is not "creating five methods of conducting game sessions", it's clear that the method is discussed separately, game sessions — separately. The game session here — is the states of the game server with the game world and the player, which are maintained together in the interconnection, it's clear how to reason about them as material objects, and not "behaviors". We will discuss such examples of "non-classical/noniron systems" later in the course).

What to do when it's unclear whether it's good or bad? For example, "let's organize the harvest" — to create a "harvest" system, or organize a work process of harvest, how should it be? There are no strict criteria, no recipes (at the course level, without delving into the details of a specific project). Ontological choices (which objects of which types to allocate in the world) — they are always probabilistic, sometimes, after a year, you need to go back and redefine something in the project: what is chosen correctly as a system, and what is poorly chosen. During numerous discussions of the target system by students of our courses, they redefine the choice of the target system almost weekly, five to six times, and each time they think, "this variant is the best!". But when they "hit the mark" — everything magically starts explaining to the surrounding in a couple of minutes, project consensus is reached instantly. It's interesting that the name of the target system usually appears very early in the speech, but the named object is not considered a target system, and sometimes it takes a month or even a couple of months to realize that this is the target system. But when a successful choice is made — it brings great relief, "the puzzle fit together".

However, just formally forming the system as "all things participating in changes", formally everything will be OK, but there will be no project agreements, because