---
title: 'Systems Approach: for all types of systems, not just the system of interest'
---

Systems thinking possesses the property of recursion in its application: it unfolds in a similar way for each system within extensive and deep systems decompositions. Distinguishing the system of interest among the numerous systemic levels of some systemic decomposition is necessary primarily to remember what constitutes a collective goal, i.e., for working in certain team projects. This is a novelty of the systems approach in its second generation, a practical (subjective/postpositivist, i.e., determined by the intention of some agent to change something in the physical world) introduction of the system-of-interest. **The system of interest is always highlighted by someone and for some purpose** **(i.e., it is used somewhere, rather than just "existing"),** **this identification of the system of interest** **is not** **"objective"** **and** **"correct/true".**

However, the concepts of systems thinking are applicable to all systems, not just to the system of interest and not even just to "our" system. Around any system, one can build a hierarchy in terms of composition and construct a creation graph in terms of creation.

Thus, the system of interest, the supersystem, the subsystems, and any other systems in the environment and even creation systems in their long chains, all have their own supersystems and subsystems (super- and sub- here always refer to composition relationships; in systemic decompositions, these prefixes are not used to indicate type and kind, variants). Distinguishing descriptions (mental object) from system documentation (carrier with the description), as well as distinguishing the system description from the system embodiment, is necessary for all systems. All systems are primarily named for their primary purpose/role in the environment and the function/method/service they perform, very rarely referring to the construction. In all systems, the subsystems interact to exhibit emergence/system effect, although in some systems this interaction is cleverly arranged—it occurs through creator systems observing the emergent properties of such systems. For example, the clientele as a system interacts with the product creator, and such characteristics as market capacity relate to the entire clientele, not to individual clients.

There may be many systems of a certain kind in a project, not necessarily just one. For instance, **the supersystems** **for one system of interest** **can be many. The system of interest can enter into multiple** **supersystems, each with its own group of external** **project roles concerned with their various needs for each of the numerous supersystems.** **And the creation** **systems** **for one system of interest** **can also be multiple.**

For example, one company designs a building, another constructs it, a third operates it, and the same third demolishes it, a fourth rebuilds it, "restores its historical appearance"—each company will be a separate system in the overall project of building creation and development. There is emergence/system effect arising from the fact that all these companies work in some sense together (and often this joint work is stipulated in contracts among these companies), and it can be said that all these are not separate creation systems, but subsystems of one creation system. But saying so is not at all necessary; usually, it is not done, and we often talk about a creation graph with creation systems in it, rather than one creation system, within which we consider the graph of creation subsystems of this encompassing single creation system.

And we usually consider exactly creation graphs, not just chains (linear sequences of systems in terms of creation). One creator can create and develop several different systems, including several different creators, and one system, including the creator, can be created by several different creators, each providing different services for this.

Even in the biological world, in the creation of most organisms, not only the female is involved but a population of two organisms: male and female, each providing their own service/method for creating offspring.

Let's also recall a common mistake of managers: the attempt to highlight a typical system of interest that they deal with in the most different and dissimilar projects. This creates serious complications: since the supersystems of these systems turn out to be completely different, it is impossible to generalize the different needs of the most different external project roles of the most different creation projects of the most different systems as if these were all external project roles with their set of needs for one super-generalized system of interest. No, projects for different types of systems of interest, which will be used in different environments and work there, providing different services/functions/methods for this environment, need to be separated, not trying to artificially unite them in thinking. If there is no emergence from unification (new properties at the moment of usage! Not at the moment of creation), then there is no need to unify some parts into an artificially created “system.”

**If a manager receives ten projects in different ways, there's no need to pretend it's one large project** **and there’s a systemic effect from uniting these ten projects into one, these ten systems of interest into one: we already mentioned many times here that** **ownership relationships, influence and resource allocation relations—** **these are not** **composition/“part-whole” relationships.**

The presence of several different systems decompositions (at least, the presence of consideration for allegedly one system of interest with various supersystems with their different external project roles) should be alarming: most likely, it's not about one project, but several—and you simply need to understand that many projects are going on simultaneously in life, and these projects somehow influence each other.

It's not about finding various decompositions by their type: functional, constructive, placement, funding sources, etc. It’s about getting several different functional or constructive decompositions of one type—and it's hard to unify them into one (although, of course, all these decompositions enter the decomposition of “the supersystem of all supersystems,” the Universe, but we are always concerned with not theoretical/formal unification, but unification for the convenience of some working methods, practical/functional unification).

Let's say you are engaged in painting sepules and assembling widgets. Do not try to unite these projects, to define the "sepule-widget system." You will have to deal with sepule painting separately, understand their supersystems, have some paint specialists (or dyers, the specifics of sepules in this regard are important!), plus have the painting tools for these sepule creators/provider units/enterprises, as providers of painting services for sepules. And separately, you will have to deal with widgets and their assembly, understand their supersystems, have a separate project with separate widget assembly specialists, separate assembly tools. Whether these projects have one chief, or even the same team handles them, the systems in these projects will be different, and nothing good will come from merging these projects in thinking (by inventing a sepule-widget system).

Don’t mix these systems, don’t mix these projects. Work with them separately. Most likely, these projects will have completely different situations, requiring different engineering, management, creative solutions, different modeling, interaction with different external project roles. Each time a generalization or unification of projects and systems occurs, the question needs to be asked: which issues will become easier to solve through this generalization or unification? Quite possibly none—and it’s better to unfold systems thinking individually in different projects, not trying to create a "super-project" from them.

In summary: to find your system of interest among others in a systemic decomposition, you need to ask questions not only about it but also answer many related questions. Questions for yourself, the beloved:

- What is *your* system of interest?
- What is the system of interest *of your* client?
- What is the system of interest *of your* team?
- What can *you* change with your decision, and what can you only influence?
- What can your client change with their decision (there are different subroles! And they may have different opinions on the solution!) and what can they only influence?
- What system do you call the system of interest for *yourself* when thinking? *Your* client? *Your* team?

Questions for yourself, as a team member:

- When *you* (who is included in this "you"? where are the boundaries of this "you", determining who and what is outside, and who and what is inside?) communicate jointly with the client, team, which system will *you* call the system of interest—yours, or the client's, or the team's? Remember the theatrical proverb: "as on rehearsal, so on performance.” It's better if in different conversations the same systems are consistently called the same.
- Whose team is it—*yours*, or your client's? Is your team inside the company "against everyone and the client", or is the entire company one team "against the client", and there isn’t your “team against the company"?
- When different people say *“we”* in the project —who's included in this "we"? Who in this "we" ultimately defines (does not approve someone else's choice, but really thinks and defines itself!) the choice of the system of interest, determines its boundaries with the environment? Who is concerned with the supersystem, i.e., whose needs are we satisfying?

**There are no prescribed answers here,** **no thinking algorithms on these topics,** **but systems thinking prompts you to reflect on the answers to these questions and come to a conclusion.** **These are questions of the second generation of systems thinking: important are not only the part-whole relationships in the systemic decomposition where the system of interest resides but also creator systems, which must be considered.**

At the same time, a lot of communication is required (systems thinking—is collective thinking!) as well as action, working within the project, making engineering decisions, not just "understanding" as an “observer/analyst," not "just thinking." You need to conduct negotiations with various external and internal project roles, team members, and external people, each of whom may have a particular interest, to conduct actions that lead to agreements on these interests, and to change the situation so that the system becomes successful—these interests are satisfied. Systems thinking is about agreements (and, of course, subsequent implementation in practice). You need to reach agreements within the project, and systems thinking suggests on which questions it is important to achieve these agreements. The first of them—is to agree on the system of interest, to define its boundaries, its role, and functions/services within the supersystem.

**Only after** **considering the organizational situation** **can you make a decision: what to consider** ***the system of interest*****, and what to consider** ***your*** ***system*** **(not necessarily will these systems coincide!).**

The last thing to do is imagine yourself as an "objective" systems thinker riding a white horse "above the fray". No, you must clearly understand—what your own project role, or set of project roles is, how professionally you can play your role, how likely you will make beginner mistakes in this role, how poorly you will perform due to the lack of skill and/or tools for the work methods you use in the project (don’t say you don’t use any methods! If you work, you use them—the other issue is that you haven’t thought about which methods they are, nor thought about how to change them).

Systems thinking will help here, but it does not contain "objective answers." Systems thinking will only assist in spending more time thinking about the important stuff, preventing forgetting about this important stuff: it will help manage attention in a large project. And it might (but not guaranteed) save you from mistakes in complex situations, not letting you get bogged down in insignificant details, help unite labor in conditions of deep labor division across various project roles scattered among various executors of these roles.

In thinking, you should practically follow the systems mantra. We won't repeat it here; we hope you can now reproduce it from memory.