---
title: Division of Labor and Systemic Levels
---

Human roles, and now the roles of AI, as well as the roles of collective agents (organizations) in projects for creating and developing various systems, specialize in different systemic levels: recursively, at each systemic level, the thinking of an engineer who assembles an acceptable target system for the supersystem (higher level) (current level) is applied, using emergence from the interaction of assembled subsystems (lower level). Each agent playing the role of such an engineer specializes in the emergence of one level, because his skill cannot be limitless: covering two levels with skill of equally high quality is much more difficult, and three even harder. Moreover, for different systems (e.g., growing canola and steelmaking), expertise in the methods of creating and developing these systems is very different, and it cannot be quickly learned and mastered to the level of fluent application. As a solution to this problem, **division of labor** appeared: different agents specialize in different methods/ways of working tied to fairly narrow types of systems tied to rather narrowly defined systemic levels. Labor works with some subject areas, and the subjects turn out to be closely tied to systemic levels, because when the systemic level changes, the properties of objects change, and thus the method of working to change systems, to obtain or remove the properties of this systemic level, changes. The more knowledge about a subject area, the harder it is for one agent to achieve expertise in this subject area: thus, one subject area is defined more narrowly, some types of systems, some additional systemic levels within them, some individual emergent properties in them are divided, and separate agents begin to specialize in achieving these emergent properties. This is called deepening the division of labor. For example, with the deepening of the division of labor, instead of one role "engineer," a set of very different roles suddenly appears---visionary, developer, architect, internal development platform engineer. Each of these roles has its own preferences in subjects of interest, so agents performing these roles will need to negotiate, and if in a very small project someone will perform all these roles together, doubts may arise about whether he has enough mastery for the good performance of each of these roles, and there may be a suspicion of a conflict of interest (many roles with conflicting interests concerning one subject of interest for one agent performing all the roles. For example, in the course "System Engineering," it will be explained in detail what the contradictions between the roles of visionary and developer, developer and architect are, and they are in productive conflict. And for one engineer-agent performing all these roles, there will inevitably be a conflict of interests).

The division of labor is ubiquitous. In the group of methods of bodywork, doctors treat body tissues, trainers create types of bodily/motor behaviors (types of movement methods) and their styles (method variations), and train adepts at the level of the body's work as a whole, cultural ambassadors take care of the cultural diversity of movements at the community level (multiple organisms performing some movements), and "body therapy" is generally about trying to solve mental problems through bringing the body into some states (usually relaxation and spontaneous movement). And this is clearly not all the systemic levels mentioned; in our example of social dances, there were clearly more of them!

That we speak of different roles and different agents will perform these different roles concerning moving human bodies---this is the division of labor. Such division of labor continues at lower systemic levels and at higher ones. For example, geneticists can identify people with special cellular metabolism, which allows selecting people for participation in competitions who are resistant to lack of oxygen in advance---and they will not be limited where it will be difficult for other athletes due to a lack of oxygen in muscle cells during exertion. High-achievement sports are increasingly becoming a competition of molecular biologists and geneticists rather than trainers, but a competition of pharmacologists is already beginning---there is a movement for sports with permitted doping, enhanced games^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enhanced_Games>], a technical solution to the problems of human body limitations. To create an athlete, the knowledge of a molecular biologist and geneticist, and the knowledge of a pharmacologist, but also a trainer's knowledge, are needed.

Changing the properties of lower-level systems leads to changes in the properties of higher-level systems---through emergence. And each type of emergence requires mastery of achieving these properties: understanding what affordances can be used as constructs to achieve desired behavior, performing the desired function in the supersystem.

Systemic thinking turns out to be deeply connected with the division of labor: at each systemic level, there are specialists skilled in achieving the systemic effect of this level---they obtain it, knowing how to assemble the system (target or "our," we are talking about very different systems) from its subsystems. But this is not enough; they also know where their assembled system can be used so that similar specialists at the higher level can use their system as a subsystem. **Each agent as a skilled master-builder understands their systemic effect and, with their work, connects three levels of systemic division---and all together, the specialists can create and develop a very complex target system and all the necessary elements for its creation and development described by the graph of creation system-creators.**

This is true for engineering, but it is also true for other fields of activity, which are also "engineering" in fact, although not quite conventional. Nevertheless, we recommend thinking of them "engineerally," as this often considerably simplifies the understanding of what is happening in projects for creating non-technical systems.

For example, in the field of bodily practices (movement methods in sports, yoga, martial arts, dance, stage movement, etc.), the engineering approach significantly speeds up understanding, eliminating numerous metaphors and artistic distractions from the essence of the matter, and providing normative/cultural/engineering division of labor. Just as hundreds of people today create a film "in an engineering way," so too can many people (and more broadly---agents, since not only people) help someone become a full-fledged participant in a dance subculture (in common parlance---make someone a good dancer, though we remember that a dancer is not yet an artist, and an artist is not yet a community participant practicing some subculture). A dance performance turns out to be multi-level, and its complexity can be overcome by using systemic thinking in relation to it.

Labor is a synonym for the method of working on creating and developing a system. Divided labor is a broad method divided into narrower methods/practices/"smaller types of labor," whereby different project agents perform work using different narrow methods of one broad method. For instance, engineering labor (broad method of work) turns out to be divided among different agents who perform narrower methods, together making up engineering labor---visionary work, development, architectural decision-making, internal development platform engineering (more about engineering as a broad method of work and narrower engineering methods will be covered in the course "System Engineering").

**Division of work** is when tasks are distributed among agents equally skilled in some method (or even sub-method) of work. For instance, fence painting work needs to be done, 100 square meters. The method chosen---painting with a roller, the role performing the method---"painter." Division of labor is when the "painter" role is singled out from the general role "builder" and assigned not to any builder but to someone skilled in painting. Division of work is when ten agents skilled in painting (with roller painting expertise) are taken, and each agent paints not 100 square meters but only 10. Only the work is divided, but the method of this work remains the same, each agent performs the entire method/practice/activity, not a part of it.

Division of labor is an evolutionary process. Labor divided among agents is usually more efficient than labor of one agent, and one can simply observe how techno-evolution works, how the culture deepens the division of labor---the division of labor optimizes collective creators, the best solutions for the division of labor are remembered and then replicated among agents. But this raises the problem: how to unite divided labor into a common labor of creating and developing a target system in one project so that the system is successful?

Systemic thinking allows uniting divided labor: it gives an understanding of why the division of labor happens, how to explain the professionalization of agents in one or another "type of labor"/"method of work." Thus, above all, the division of labor happens for labor/methods of work associated with objects of different systemic levels. If we highlight the "engine as a black box" in an airplane, transparent box solutions for it may be handled by others at a lower systemic level, the "engineers"---at each systemic level, some subject specifics, new properties appear, often requiring changes in the specialization of engineering roles.

If this happens at many levels with the most different systems of each of these levels, we will increase the system's success chances: not achieving the ideal (this is impossible! Techno-evolution allows only reaching some quasi-optimum, "local optimum" each time), but an approximation to the ideal. Usually, it is enough for us if the system is not perfect, but slightly more optimal than the competitors' systems ("to escape from the lion, you don't have to run faster than the lion, just faster than the slowest person fleeing from the lion").

What is important is that after creating and beginning the operation of the initial system, all this continues: continuous development of new and new possibilities of the system, new variants of technical solutions, realization of new features, continuous introduction into operation, "continuous everything." Previously, requirements were satisfied once, now the system is created and then continuously developed further, often not by one team, but by very different teams specializing in creating and developing very different types of systems. Division of labor helps cope with complexity: there's no need to pack all the knowledge about the system and work methods for its creation into one agent's (either individual or collective) expertise.

Modern dancers' or figure skaters' performances are immeasurably more complex and interesting than they were a hundred years ago, and learning to dance or figure skate to a comparable level today can be done much faster because methods for creating and developing mastery have improved immeasurably over a century. Spacecraft (those didn't exist at all a hundred years ago), computing equipment, software systems, medical robots---creating all of them requires many different kinds of mastery among agents, but with the division of labor, one can rely on the fact that this mastery can be learned quickly (with sufficient intellect).

**Division of labor related to gaining competency** **in working on three adjacent systemic levels (understanding what and how to do at the current target system level,** **knowing what to do and where and** **how to use it---** **understanding supersystems, knowing** **how the components are built---** **understanding subsystems) gives an opportunity to build long chains of activities** of very different people, breaking the overall super-complex activity at all systemic levels into many not so complex ones at each systemic level.

But it should be noted that at higher evolutionary/systemic/organizational levels of complexity than organizations/collectives of intellectual agents, there are problems with systematic descriptions and engineering approaches for people with both division of labor and descriptions of the best methods for social engineering (as opposed to "letting things take their course," i.e., relying on evolution). The frontier of systemic thinking goes along the line of mastering the creation of collective-level systems of community and society levels. Engaging in systemic thinking in such projects should be done with caution, understanding its application to simpler systems. The level of the individual is already extremely complex; an organization of many individuals is even more complex, but engineering copes with that. However, talking about the division of labor (apart from saying that "market forces are at work") at the community, society, humanity level---is very difficult. There is not enough knowledge about creating communities, societies, humanity/"agentality" in sufficient quantities to break it down among different agents and specialize them in different types of mastery---such knowledge is currently lacking. Although politicians have "headquarters," where some division of labor can be observed. But be careful with projects aimed at creating communities, societies and humanity ("agentality": including both societal levels and community levels, and comprising AI agents in addition to people, hence "agentality," not "humanity").