---
title: Complexity and Measures of Complexity
---

The concept of complexity has been intensively developed not only within the framework of **system studies** (i.e., studies on the development of a systems approach) but also in many other scientific and even engineering disciplines/theories. There is no final consensus on what complexity is, and none is anticipated: different types of complexity are interesting for different projects and different roles within those projects. Seth Lloyd compiled some examples of definitions for measures of complexity^[<http://web.mit.edu/esd.83/www/notebook/Complexity.PDF>]. He categorized all these definitions as attempts to answer three questions:

**1.** **How difficult is it to describe the system?** This is usually measured in bits spent to represent the description. Complexity measures here include information, entropy, algorithmic complexity or algorithmic information content, maximum description length, Fisher information, Rényi entropy, code length (prefix-free, Huffman, Shannon-Fano, error-correcting, Hamming), Chernoff information, dimension, fractal dimension, Lempel-Ziv complexity.

**2.** **How difficult is it to create the system?** Complexity as the difficulty of creation is measured in time, energy, dollars, etc. Complexity measures here include computational complexity, temporal computational complexity, spatial computational complexity, information-based complexity, logical depth, thermodynamic depth, cost, crypticity.

**3. What is the degree of organization?** There can be two options here:

**a)** **Effective complexity**, the difficulty of describing the organizational structure, be it corporate, chemical, cellular. Here are the terms in English: Metric Entropy; Fractal Dimension; Excess Entropy; Stochastic Complexity; Sophistication; Effective Measure Complexity; True Measure Complexity; Topological epsilon-machine size; Conditional Information; Conditional Algorithmic Information Content; Schema length; Ideal Complexity; Hierarchical Complexity; Tree subgraph diversity; Homogeneous Complexity; Grammatical Complexity.

**b)** **The amount of information that needs to be exchanged between parts of the system due to such an organizational structure**: Algorithmic Mutual Information; Channel Capacity; Correlation; Stored Information; Organization.

There are also concepts that are not complexity concepts but are very close: Long-Range Order; Self-Organization; Complex Adaptive Systems; Edge of Chaos. There are also completely alternative complexity measures (for example, based on the speed of describing the assessed objects, rather than the volume of this description^[<http://people.idsia.ch/~juergen/speedprior.html>]).

The situation with the concept of "complexity" is very characteristic of the systems approach: the words used in it seem quite "everyday" and having clear and intuitively understandable meanings from childhood. But no, these words suddenly turn out to be terms behind which very different concepts are hidden, these concepts are worked on by very different logical or quantitative models of various schools of thought, quantitative measurements of very different characteristics of them are carried out for very different purposes.

**Within our course, we will consider a system complex if it consists of a sufficiently large number of elements, large enough that one individual agent cannot assess all connections and interactions with accuracy sufficient for rational design actions.**

For example, if we are talking about human agents, in the project of creating and developing an organization, the system in this organization can easily be five hundred people. This is more than enough for one head not to be able to assess all the connections and interactions of these people, even if one head keeps records in their computer-exocortex. Such an organizational system is inherently complex.

It is equally difficult for one agent (even a collective one) to hold all connections and interactions in the system of a smartphone, in the system of a nuclear power plant, and many other engineering systems---expanded enterprises in such projects combine the work of very diverse individual autonomous enterprises. Someone designs the processor chip for the smartphone, someone manufactures the processor chip, someone designs the smartphone, someone designs marketing campaigns---a multitude of very different enterprises, with many smart people involved, all pursuing their own interests, negotiating some interests. This is all complex, extremely complex.

For our purposes of teaching systems thinking, this informal understanding of complexity is quite sufficient, but you should remember that there are also formal understandings of complexity, there are many theories of complexity from which these formal understandings have come.

In physical theories of the evolutionary growth of complexity in biological systems, the main definition follows another line: the number of operations needed to create a particular biological object^[Complexity is notoriously difficult to define precisely, and no single, universal definition has been agreed upon (24--26), although it seems to be commonly held that "when we see it, we know it." The definitions of complexity that appear to be meaningful in biology involve, depending on the level of analysis, the number of evolutionarily conserved nucleotide sites in genomes and the number of genes or functional components in organisms or sub-organismal functional systems, as well as the hierarchical organization of biological entities, be it functional networks and pathways, cells, organisms, or communities (20--23, 27). Perhaps the most general definition, pathway complexity, deriving from the concept of algorithmic complexity in mathematics, includes the number of steps required to create a given object. It has been proposed that entities with a pathway complexity above a certain threshold can only originate from biological processes (23). And further by the references in the work "Physical foundations of biological complexity," from where this quote is taken, <https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1807890115>].

Systems thinking does not provide any "objective answers" to questions about systems. These answers always depend on which role from which interest is asking, and which role from which interest is giving the answer, which conflicts of which system levels we are trying to overcome, and what ethics we adhere to.

**In systems thinking, there is no step-by-step algorithm that leads to the correct answer (and this is not surprising: remember the disorder: a huge number of very different answers give a huge number of approximately the same suboptimal quality solutions), there is no sequence of steps guaranteeing some acceptable result of this thinking, there are no "typical cases." There will always be nuances that make the "typical" absolutely atypical.**

Systems thinking is complex, it takes a long time to master---in this it resembles some kind of "non-objective higher mathematics," more or less typical reasoning over a set of objects with types prescribed by the systems approach. Systems thinking does not even strive to give precise definitions to its concepts: different agents tend to adapt these concepts for their very different current interests of the roles they are performing.

Despite all this uncertainty, **the concepts of systems thinking allow us to compactly and simply describe a complex world to manage collective attention in complex project situations!** Alternative options (for example, reductionism or holism---when you clearly do not use system levels to organize people's attention in the project) turn out to be much, much worse.