---
title: 'The Ontology of Inventiveness: Constructs as Affordances for Roles'
---

The system is physical: it has a purpose/function in changing the state of physical objects in the environment (also systems). No one needs the system to change its internal states; it's necessary for these changes in the internal states of the system to somehow influence the state of external systems. No one needs the gears of a mechanical clock to turn evenly by themselves, but the clock is required to "show time," which is the usefulness of the clock, its function, the role of the construct "clock" --- "time indicator." Whether this is achieved by gears or electronics, or even using the Sun as very crude (accurate to an hour) and unreliable (cloudiness possible) clocks in the "sundial" construct --- this is important, but only after we have figured out what is needed at the moment of operation. And the needed function is "showing time" with such accuracy and reliability. If these are clocks in a rocket, then mechanical clocks and sundials as material/construct objects are unsuitable, but electronic clocks may be appropriate. But until we look at the "time indicator in the rocket environment at the moment of launch," we can't say anything about what constructs might be suitable for us, and that was discussed in the previous section.

The system always performs some function during its use, that is, it changes the state of the environment. The system::role and function of the system::role are always determined at the moment of its operation. However, the system::construct --- this is the consideration at the moment of creation when we estimate what material objects will be processed in what ways to achieve a successful system::role (roughly speaking, the material/construct of gears and springs, electronics, or a stick and some plane with a scale and placement in an open area will be clocks::construct/materials). The choice we make from a long row of possible constructs --- this is an affordance, "the suitable one."

The system::role may have a name different from the name of the system::construct, as the construct objects are considered outside the environment during use, but during creation. Most often the constructs/materials from which the system is created are named after the primary function of these constructs when similar types of systems were considered as roles. For example, if you are interested in the "paperweight"::role with the function "holding papers from flying in the wind by its weight," then the constructs/"construct objects"/"material objects"/materials stone, microscope, hammer --- all can be called affordances (that is if they are chosen to hold papers, to perform the function) and "paperweight." This does not make them less of a stone, microscope, hammer, but their role behavior/function will be --- holding papers from flying.

**The function of the system::role** **is conveyed by gerunds (verbal nouns): “holding” (from the verb “to hold”), in English, this is the -ing** **form of verbs.** In the case of the creator system, the term will be from the synonymous series function/practice/culture/method of work, but this does not change the naming rules. Of course, not all schools of thought adhere to this rule (they may use the verb in the infinitive), but still today such naming of functions is the most common. And the naming always refers to the time of engagement/operation/exploitation/use/functioning of the system when it changes the state of systems in its environment.

And this is always the time of exploitation (the time of practicing the creation system is the time of creating the target system, but the time of exploitation/use/functioning/practicing the creation system).

Without a typewriter in your head, it is hard to understand. For example, “the function of an engineer is the design, planning, and implementation of a system.” The phrase speaks of the function of some object --- the engineer. If it is about function, it refers to the engineer::role, the engineer not at the moment of his creation (training the agent, appointing the agent to the role of engineer), but at the moment of the engineer system functioning, when the engineer changes the state of the environment, that is, transfers some target system from the states “not designed,” “not planned,” “not implemented” to the states “designed,” “planned,” “implemented.”

Who will be this “engineer”? Some “suitable construct object”/affordance --- this may turn out to be Pyotr Fyodorovich, but it may also be LLC "Atomstroyautomatautomatica." How so? This way: the phrase speaks about function, directly indicating that the functional/role object “engineer” is considered in its environment. The phrase says nothing about the construct/material object, that is, it does not indicate the "suitable thing"/affordance that will then "perform the function"/"play the role." The engineer thus can be an AI agent, an undead, or an entire enterprise.

If you are told that the function of a nail-driving device is “driving a nail,” that is, the nail in the environment of this device transitions from the state “not driven” to the state “driven,” then this is an implicit indication of the type: “nail-driving device”::role, and it is about the time of use of this device. The target system, changing its state as a result of performing the function, is the nail.

But a hammer, microscope, or stone as an affordance for a "nail-driving device" as a system creating a "driven nail" will play the role of this device, or a crafty robot on quantum crystals, it doesn't matter --- this is important for the moment of creating the nail-driving device. It is necessary to separate the discussion of functionality (what needs to be done, purpose, function, and role) and constructiveness (what to do it from) to be able to change constructs without changing the function. If you need "to move a ton of cargo from point A to point B," you separately discuss what kind of cargo it is, what are the start and finish points, how much of this cargo there is --- and only then you begin to choose the method/style/way of movement, and only after that --- who can implement this method. This is the basis of **inventiveness** (selecting the minimal set of affordances to perform the function). **System thinking thus explicitly** **provides** **the ontology of** **inventiveness.**

**If you don't know what affordances your system has ---** **don't attempt to make it!** Charles Babbage and his assistant Ada Lovelace described a computer: a calculating machine with the function of converting input data for some mathematical tasks into output data. The function is computing by a changeable algorithm. But the affordance they took was mechanical constructs. Later, they tried to take pneumatic, electric (relay) constructs too, and it also didn't work out: terribly low reliability, terribly low speed of operation.

What was needed? To take as a construct (i.e., an affordance chosen from all other options) radio tubes-triodes, which were invented by the American Lee De Forest only half a century after the death of Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace, and the invention of using triodes for the computer happened another half-century later. The functional description of the computer (what happens during its operation to achieve the desired result) was made, but there were problems with finding affordances (inventiveness!) for a whole century, that is, two times for half a century: the invention of the amplifying triode --- half a century from the start of the Babbage and Lovelace universal programmable computer project, then the invention of the triode and setting up mass production of cheap amplifying triodes --- half a century, and only then using the triode-construct in the key mode "logical switch" as part of the computer, thereby getting the first truly universal and useful computer ENIAC. And then it took several more decades to wait to replace the tube triodes with transistors, including transistors in integrated circuits. Only after that did computers become a mass product.

Affordances as constructs/materials usually "come from the side," that is, they are the material products of other industries. The klystron as a radio tube for microwaves came into kitchens not from the industry that produced primus stoves, kerogases, and gas burners. If you have no idea what may be an affordance for your system description (say, the “magic tablecloth” system, whose function is to feed ten people for five rubles), then you risk ending up in a situation like the inventors of the computer or the inventors of heavier-than-air flying machines, which could not be invented until there were light internal combustion engines: the Wright brothers were not accidentally owners of a workshop for making and repairing motorcycles. More details about all these stories can be found in the materials on strategy in the "System Management" course. But to understand this strategizing, you need to have an idea of the system::role and its function at the moment of exploitation, embodying this system::role in the system::construct, which will be the affordance during the creation of the system::role. And understand that **selecting an affordance ---** **this is inventiveness.**