---
title: Second and Third Generations of the Systemic Approach
---

For many years in the systemic approach, it was believed that systems were "objective" regarding their purpose. For example, an airplane — clearly, everyone understands what kind of system this is, what its purpose/function is! Or a radar — no disagreements on why it's needed and what its environment is! Or even a lab mouse studied by biologists — no need to specially discuss its purpose/function, right?!

The systemic approach was presented as a method to model the most important aspects in this "objectively existing system" — which also seemed obvious, except for a little clarification and numerical expression. Nothing subjective, "pure science," quite formalizable. Textbooks on the first generation of the systemic approach were easily recognizable by their abundance of mathematics. If a textbook on systemic thinking/approach contains many formulas, it's a sure sign that it is an exposition of systemic thinking from no later than the 1970s. And the more biology and "self-organization," the earlier the book.

But in the late seventies, systemic thinkers noticed that engineering, as opposed to simple physical and biological systems, always involve creators-humans in terms of their creation and development. This was mainly due to the shift from studying naturally growing (biological, "natural") systems to systems engineering — where radars and airplanes did not grow by themselves in the forest or field but had to be created by someone, by other creator-systems. And these creators had to make these systems for something needed by someone else (customers), that is also for people (there were, of course, no AI agents at this time). The larger the engineering project, the more people it involved, the more it was necessary to negotiate the "why make this system," considering various human interests, making the "objectivity" of understanding the system's purpose cease to be obvious. The purpose of the system turned out to be the result of many people's agreements.

People (individually, in teams, enterprises, and extended enterprises — that is, many enterprises united within the framework of a major contract for the creation and development of a target system, such as a nuclear power plant) gave systems roles in certain environments (larger systems), clarified the functions that these systems had to perform in their environment. Without creator-people there was no system, just some "object" without any clear definition (since no one assigned it, no one paid attention to it, no one needed it for their activities, no one could clarify its boundaries, and any fanciful descriptions of such an object could not be discussed).

Systemic thinking cannot apply to systems that no one is interested in; there would be no one to apply it, no one interested! In "hardware," software, education, and training (personality engineering), management (enterprise engineering), and various other projects, it turned out that their target systems are not "objective," they are subjective! They are defined by agents (in a narrow sense, "intelligent agents capable of planning," people, and AI agents) who play roles relative to the various project systems: constructors::role, users::role of these systems, victims::role of these systems, and more.

The version of the systemic approach that appeared from the mid-seventies to the mid-eighties of the 20th century, which accounts for systems being created and developed by other creator systems often involving people, was called **Systemic Approach 2.0 ("second-generation systemic approach").** **It involved less mathematics and more discussions about people. Besides describing the target system, it became important to describe the creator-systems of this target system.**

The roles of agents relative to various (target, subsystems, suprasystems, creation systems in their long chains and graphs of creation) systems turned out to be extremely diverse.

The role in participating (helping or harming — from the system's project role or from the system's project role) in projects of conceptualizing, creating, modifying, operating, or destroying the system was termed "project role" (stakeholder role, interested party, actor). These project roles are performed by agent-actors/actors/actors (a term from the use case method but also a widely used term). In systems engineering, the term stakeholders appeared often for agents::construct, though sometimes the term stakeholder is used to denote the role itself; thus, they confuse the stakeholder-actor and stakeholder-role, in which the actor is currently involved.

The activity, labor, cultural, practical, engineering (you may have noticed that there can be many synonyms here, "project role" is just one of them) roles, construct/material systems of which are generally cultural-conditioned — by their activity pattern/type of work/type of culture/practice/type of engineering/method/work mode/function, etc. It's unlikely that anyone would do the job by some method/style/practice/function for the first time in the world, so the method of work and role are probably named somehow already; hence, one should not invent new terms but use the existing names of the method and role from the language. For example, if someone::agent-construct (e.g. John Smith) engages in unauthorized data access, this activity is called hacking::method, and he is called a hacker::role.

In the early versions of this new (i.e. from the 70s) systemic approach, in which systems were made by people, and not "objectively" existed and evolved on their own, project roles considered were only those impacting the system and its associated project, so much so that it could not be ignored (e.g., ordering the system's creation, paying for the creation — neglecting such a role leaves no funds for the work!). Later, it was amended: those who are influenced by the target system and its creators in the project framework are also considered project roles — this includes not only those who may step on your foot but also upon whose foot you step (or may step)! Thinking concerning people in the systemic approach became more "Newtonian," less "Aristotelian" ("finger presses on the table, and the table presses on the finger"): people interact with systems, not just act on systems!

Similar arguments about the "observer" in physics (we provided references to such research in the previous section) and arguments about active perception in biological systems developed by Karl Friston's group^[<https://www.activeinference.org/> --- an institute developing active inference ideas as practical/proactive reasoning/inference in various systems.] gave a new turn to this line of thinking in systemic thinking. It turns out, it's not just about human beings as "conscious beings," but about a way of reasoning where systems can seemingly relate to other systems — and people, as rational beings, can indeed relate to non-living systems, other people, human organizations, and anything else, but this ability to testify (i.e., measure something) to the existence of other systems and even of one's own system (self-evidence, determining/measuring one's state, often examined in Fields and Glazebrook's works) seems, due to panpsychism in a minimal physicalist variant, inherent in all systems! **All systems can be regarded as (though in varying degrees) practical/proactive/agentive/reasonable and even intelligent/conscious!**

This "all systems" includes not only animals and further plants, bacteria, or some computer systems but also organizations (for ants, it's an ant colony — and we referenced work evaluating the "consciousness" level of an ant colony as a whole compared to that of individual ants, for humans it's a project team, an enterprise with many projects, and even communities and societies with many enterprises, and we mentioned astrophysics work considering humanity together with Earth as a "living entity").

Biologists have long been discussing the "problem of the individual"^[<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/entries/biology-individual/>], as it's not clear which system (or object not reductionist to a system, although usually a system or at least types of systems) in nature should be seen as the main subject of evolution: genome? The organism developed from the genome? Population/family/pride/pack (male and female — this is no longer an organism but a population)? Population in the habitat? These are very different systems! And all are alive (to some degree) and conscious (to some degree), so when considering the influence of some systems on others, it is necessary to account for not only the roles of individual people but roles of entirely different systems! The thesis is very unusual, but the literature shows that this thesis allows for productive discussions of such situations, which are otherwise incomprehensible if humans are regarded as exceptional in agency, the sole representatives of "agents in a narrow sense."

The second generation of systemic thinking brought in human-creators because we moved from physics-biology to engineering, and without it, it was no longer possible, but if humans as agents were considered exceptional in the systemic approach, we would lose scalability in discussions. The Systemic Approach 2.0 (created from the mid-70s to mid-80s of the 20th century) counts a history of 40 years by the early 2020s — a significant term! But it proves to be a systemic approach of the scale of one organizational project and the lifespan of one human project. This greatly narrows the framework of system consideration.

More and more thinkers are transitioning to discussing universal creators, not necessarily humans and collectives of humans. An example can be the research program of David Deutsch on the development of constructor theory^[<https://www.constructortheory.org/>]. A feature of the English language: for Deutsch, it's creator/builder, not "constructor" from a design bureau or metal "constructor"! A creator::system changes the environment in a certain way while itself remaining unchanged and retaining the ability to change this environment in this way repeatedly. The simplest "creator" is a catalyst molecule, a more complex "creator" is a robot with a universal computer inside, and even more complex — a human, but even society appears as such a "creator." Deutsch's creators can participate in creation chains (remember that in physics, systems were taken as already given, in biology, they ate-drank-grew by themselves, but in engineering, creators::system were needed to create target systems), and creators can, if they have the corresponding knowledge/program (a person and even a factory have a universal computer, theoretically equivalent to Turing's machine) repair and change themselves, not just the environment. Thus, Deutsch's creators are quite suitable:

- For discussing physics (Deutsch's main idea was to propose a type of scale-invariant physical object allowing discussions of both the micro-world with quantum physics and the macro-world with gravity theory, where scale invariance is critical)
- For discussing engineering (any machine — creator! And human — creator! And factory — creator! The difference being there are "simple creators," but there are universal creators theoretically capable of creating anything not forbidden by the laws of physics, creating tools for creating this "anything" and creating similar creators to scale up their creations)
- For discussing life as continuous system complexity (we mentioned Vanchurin, Wolf, Katsnelson, Kunin's work on this — the idea that dissonances between system levels lead to increased organizational complexity, called life)
- For uniform discussions of creation chains and graphs in systemic thinking, where these chains can include machines, humans, organizations of humans and machines, and AI agents.

Currently, many works likely belong to **Third Generation Systemic Approach, Systemic Thinking 3.0**^[<https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11524>]**.** Works on the third-generation systemic approach emphasize scale invariance in system sizes (from quantum to cosmological) and time (from femtoseconds to billions of years, to consider quantum-mechanical systems with their fleeting processes and cosmic systems with their billions of years, necessary for life evolution).

The trend is for humans not to be highlighted as something special in descriptions of the physical world. Explanations of humans' special role, such as "human — that sounds proud!," or "it's our species, we must be its patriots!," or "only humans are intelligent, they are the kings of nature!" — are poor, as reliable explanations of the surrounding world or the creation of truly complex systems cannot be built on them. Given the emergence of AI agents and the acceleration of genetic engineering on Earth, these explanations become obsolete. Science and the scientific method begin to be replaced by arbitrarily taken "ethical" statements.

Problems with these explanations of the world as a "picture of the world depending on its description precisely by living people" lead to proposing more and more works discussing physical and biological issues based on scale invariance in systemic approach concepts. Terminology is being sought: people are replaced by "agents" (you've noticed this trend in our course text), and now, even "agency" turns out not to be primary — different systems have different capabilities in what was related to "agency," meaning they are all reasonably conscious to varying degrees, with different memory capacities and modeling abilities, varying computational capabilities for action planning, different applicability. In any case, current attempts are to describe the physical world as scale-invariant in space and time descriptions of diverse systems, not "a human world as perceived by humans as traditionally viewed last century."

Goals of de-anthropomorphizing world descriptions in language and thought (final departure from anthropocentrism^[<https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Антропоцентризм>]):

- Moving thoughts and language away from specific system levels of "human" in the evolution of the universe. If we have multi-level evolution, a coherent language to discuss the problem of the individual in biology must be ensured, talk about individual multi-levelness, have a name for the "evolutionary unit" (discourse on genetic and memetic evolutions, replicators, genes, memes). And one can thus understand "individual," "agent" (in the broad sense), IPU (information processing unit)^[<https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2120037119>] — it is the same! A molecule can also be an individual/agent/IPU, a human-as-one-organism, even a society!
- Moving from parochial/parochial (specific, for the current situation of humans on Earth) thinking to a general physics-based view. Astrophysicists and mathematicians — are physical systems, albeit highly complex, and countries — are also physical systems, although more complex than astrophysicists and mathematicians (whose roles played by people, although occasionally by AI agents. These roles could be played by research institutes of human astrophysicists and mathematicians along with AI agents involved in these institutes).
- Identifying transdisciplinary reasoning along the line of "inert matter"-being-"rational personality"-organization-community-society. In terms of simple physicality, these are creators/constructors, and in the realm of intelligent beings, these are agents and multi-agent systems. Terminology may differ, but definitely not "human," while creators become universal creators, universal constructor^[<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=40CB12cj_aM>], i.e. potentially anything (theoretically anything! Like Turing's universal machine can theoretically perform any computations if discussing something mathematically computable) transforming substance into target systems, if not forbidden by the laws of physics. Constructor theory, multilevel evolution, active inference, and agency approach in philosophy^[<https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/agency/>] mostly work in this direction.
- Considering not only animals and humans but also cyborgs, artificial intelligences, along with their equipment for altering the physical world, extending to their organizations/collectives and communities, even societies and the whole "agenthood" (if within anthropocentrism, we would have said "humanity").
- Transitioning to a new praxeology^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Praxeology>] (a general theory of purposeful action, approximating methodology), sociology, politics, economics, jurisprudence: overcoming numerous issues arising when discussing dissonances between different systemic levels in society of humans and non-humans alike, including accounting for distributed computing and actions within firms, markets, working with resource pools (ownership and collective ownership), including computational/thinking resources and resources for improving the world (by varying standards of this "betterment," recalling system contradictions of different systemic levels).
- Unlinking the problem of attention (consciousness) management from specific human traits, discussing not only humans but those combined with animals and computers, including robots with sensors and actuators/effectors: narrow-sense agents as universal creators/constructors with certain capabilities for modeling and planning, of varying nature, including their organizations and populations: teams, firms, ecosystems, communities, societies, and also peer networks of agents in swarms and many similar settings, considering the heterogeneity of participants in these agent/creator organizations.
- More productive discussions on ethics (extropianism^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extropianism>], transhumanism^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transhumanism>], bioethics, AI ethics, issues of society's subordination of people and non-humans, society's subordination to humanity, and the like) amidst infinite biological and technological development and the presence of many systemic levels with unavoidable contradictions between systems of these levels and mechanisms akin to "frustration"^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometrical_frustration>].
- \... and much more, which becomes easier to discuss by moving away from strict adherence to a single systemic level "human-individual." Such adherence not only yields a "Ptolemaic model of man"^[<https://ailev.livejournal.com/1390574.html>], but also a "Ptolemaic model of the world" solely around the human species, despite their declared extraordinary rationality. Moving away from this parochial "for humans on Earth" model towards a more general, non-anthropocentric, scale-invariant one, based on the continuous evolution of the universe (part of which is Darwinian evolution of life on Earth, and today's non-Darwinian techno-evolution) is necessary.