---
title: '4D systemicity: patterns in space-time, rhythms'
---

Systemicity — it is always 4D systemicity, while in 3D our systemic levels correspond to different scales of parts of the traditionally understood physical system by their sizes (lengths — parsecs, meters, nanometers), and repetitiveness/patterns are described by shapes/forms. Moving to 4D, in time we also talk about systemic levels: the time scale is defined by "size" in time (durations — billions of years, minutes, femtoseconds), and repetitiveness/patterns are described by rhythms/cadence.

Systemic rhythmics[^1] — we look not only at the classically understood musical and dance "rhythm", but also consider other levels of consideration in music and dance: cadence at the tact level (several seconds) and at the level of the musical/dance phrase (dozen seconds), large forms at the level of the piece (for example, verses-choruses in songs, climaxes-resolutions in dance performances — up to a minute), at the album/concert or party level — the level of the "set" (twenty-forty minutes), "big concert form" (this is a forgotten level in music after the start of streaming services, where some movement rhythm of some idea about half an hour to an hour also forms, it remains today only in the form of DJ sets on mixcloud[^2]). Further, more significant rhythms in music and dance can follow — regular dance parties and philharmonic subscriptions (weekly and monthly), regular festivals (annually).

In the rhythm itself, we distinguish

-   functional temporal parts (roles in rhythm) and
-   constructive temporal parts (what we make of it, what onsets-offsets emerge on what movement — beats, or notes, or gestures, or scientific-technical council meetings, or the morning tooth brushing).

It's easiest to comprehend this where rhythms are abstract and primary: music and dance, starting with the "tact level" (it doesn't even have a special name! Rhythmics in everyday life ignores systemicity, in literature on rhythmics there is no systemicity yet, systemicity needs to be introduced there, this is the frontier of systemic thought. To some extent, this overlaps with current investigations into patterns of unfolding physics in time, for example, time crystals[^3]).

**Multidancer**::"type/specialization of a dancer role" dances in significant stylistic diversity. A multidancer works with systemic rhythmics but also with various levels of embodiment (literally: different body parts, the whole body, the body in the environment, a pair of partners in the environment, and so on), unfolding all of this at different rhythm levels.

One of the discussion problems is the need to consider the difference in referential indices (description from the first person — the dancer, or the third person — the external coach or spectator). The body — is what is perceived from outside by the third person, soma — is the body perceived from within. Therefore, for the multidancer, the rhythmics is not bodily, but somatic.

**Systemic somatomechanics** (biomechanics — is the mechanics of the body/body as perceived by a biologist "from the outside", and somatomechanics — is the mechanics of the soma/soma/organism) precisely gives the possibility of discussing the movement of the soma, that is, the movement of the body perceived and generated from within. Of course, systemic somatomechanics works for various methods/ways/cultures/styles of movement — figure skating, sitting at the computer, swimming, wrestling, multidance (the method by which a multidancer-dancer moves). In the synonymous row, in the case of movements, the term "method" or "way" is often not used, but "culture" and "style" are. Multidance thus includes many substyles/subcultures of dancing.

In rhythmics, we are interested in patterns/templates/repetitions/laws of changes in the body and dancer's soma, with changes at different time scales, minimally:

-   Slow scale of initial training as "creating craft/MVP", that is, the transfer of culture basics. The dancer's personality states change during the creation/manufacture/training, the time of creating a dancer, craft is created by the agent at the most abstract levels of the memome: principles of "dance composition"/"universal large movement patterns", lexicon/"less universal smaller movement patterns", "dance style"/"smallest movement patterns". In professional ballet, about ten years are given for this, in social/partner dances (amateur level) about a couple of years. The output is an MVP of craft, replication of culturally conditioned foundations. It is not customary to talk about "rhythmics" on such time scales, but that does not mean it is not there. Experiments show that the longer the time intervals (years), the worse people are at reasoning about such intervals. This ability to reason about long time intervals needs to be specially learned.
-   A faster scale of memome change during personal creativity, the development of a personal unique substyle/manner, the update of the dancer's craft (smart mutations of the memome, obtained by changing the dancing craft during memome mutations, observed by spectators and felt from within by the dancer, thus the method changes as well because the algorithm has changed). This is continuous activity, "skill development", evolution. With success, the emergence of a new dance style, if the result of these memome changes is recognized as significantly deviated from the culturally conditioned standard. Changes here at the scale of six months to a year. Such time intervals are already available for discussion, but working with them requires concentration, manifesting at this time scale — and this is not so trivial, here you can't just say "focus!" to get an immediate effect. Written culture helps, of course: tracking achievements in writing (in the case of dancing, for example, you can make video recordings and store them).
-   Fast scale of phenome change (state of body and soma during the application of dancing craft in performance/output/execution), work/functioning of the dancer's craft. Changes here are in the rhythm of the music — the longest time measure at the composition level (say, three and a half minutes of dance time), and the short measure is fractions of a second between pulse beats in the music.

This necessity of considering different time scales runs as a red thread through all works on evolution, emphasizing that the difference between the typical time of events on different scales will differ by several orders of magnitude (indeed: from fractions of a second to several years — that's many orders of magnitude!).

Multidance::method/culture/style::behavior sounds like a noun (dance), but it is a behavior style (type of behavior) engaged in by the multidancer's role during the "dance work" (application of the method). Multidance is also a composite method (broken down into different included smaller cultures/styles/methods/ways of dancing, such as tango, salsa, kizomba — in multidance all three will be involved).

And we consider that the hierarchy of various divisions should not bear different names — therefore calling large patterns "composition", smaller ones "dance content/lexicon/figures", and even smaller ones "dance style", and sometimes highlighting personal even smaller structure as "manner" — is a poor method/style of naming. If a multi-level/hierarchical structure is given, it is better to leave the type of objects at each level the same, unless prefixing "sub-" and "super-" (and at the same time ensuring that it concerns compositional relations and not specialization/kind-species, so it is better to say "kind", like "Cuban salsa" is a "kind of salsa", alongside "New York salsa").

The number of levels in divisions changes, attribution to specific levels is a subject of agreements in the project. What in one project pertains to the dance composition level, in another project will be the dance style level — therefore, it would be good to somehow standardize division of movement/behavior/change patterns within a project in terms of the names of this division. How? Decide this within your dance project, there are no established names for methods/practices/cultures of the dance stack methods.

All the same can be considered in relation to any other agents, including even agents in a broad sense, that is, not very "smart". For example, some simple washing machine automaton that "perceives itself from within" through measurements from some water level and temperature sensors, thus having an analogue of "organism", external behavior of "body"/equipment and orientation towards "soma"/equipment-"felt"-from-within. Of course, "sensor measurement" is very conditionally related to "feelings", therefore, quotes are used, it is an anthropocentric metaphor. Well, if we talk about some organization, comparing it to a dancer is a common metaphor. What we bring here:

-   **referential index** (whether we refer in descriptions of practice to the external body or internal soma, sometimes called "perception position")
-   Evolutionarily understood **rhythm** (frequencies differing by three orders in the course of evolution — norm, we remember the work of the Vanchurin group).

**Concentration** also works with attention management in 4D, it needs to be considered on different time scales: right at the spot, "right now" for a few seconds, for the time of a long discussion (from a few minutes to a few hours), for the time of habit formation or project execution (month-year), for holding long periods (several years, planning education, planning engagement in some area, executing very long projects like designing and building nuclear power plants). Besides these time intervals, it is necessary to note which systems, their supersystems, and subsystems are highlighted by attention and at what systemic level we work, which important characteristics we consider, how and when (rhythm!) we remember interrupted discussion about some objects and move to others. Concentration also seems like a noun, but it is a method/culture/practice engaged in by the "concentrated" agent (in our case, we prefer the instrumental rather than purely "mental/brain" method of concentration, which is most often an agent-cyborg, that is, a person with a computer or at least paper-pen — concentration is ensured not by the skill of a "brain trained for good memory", but by the skill of using reliable external memory, attention is held by reminders of important objects on an external carrier relative to the brain).

In **systemic** **management**, we consider the organization as a system, highlight systemic levels in the organization (hierarchy of org-roles, hierarchy of org-links), adhere to systemic levels of the target system (different methods and thereby different org-roles work with different levels of the target system), comprehend the course of creation and development of target systems in terms of the rhythmicity of development steps (steps of creating increments and transitioning to the operation of created increments) and reducing the time of such steps. Management also adopts various rhythms (cycles/cadence/rhythms), unfolding over time on different scales in the course of creation and development: PDCA, OODA, POOGI cycles, and many others (considered in the "Systemic Management" course). Production rhythmicity is also the subject of operational management: the batch flow through production and sales to eliminate delays (rhythm disruptions). All types of management methods consider time anchoring and some cyclicity/rhythmicity/"time unfolding patterns", and this is common for any engineering, not just organizational engineering.

**Leadership** (one of the management methods) deals with setting up the agent as an actor in an organizational/project/labor role and establishing cooperation (analogous to "creation, assembly, and adjustment of a technical system from parts"). In leadership, we keep attention to organizational systems at three minimum time levels. Starting with 1) attention time in the spot, "seconds" (leading a leadership conversation with an agent being set in a role, with all unexpected turns in communication), 2) leadership conversation time as minutes and hours, 3) time of establishing a habit for action in the role as usually weeks-months, 4) existential time as "replacing some role habits with others", years of career growth and profession changes. Leadership as a method of work is engaged by the role of the leader (agent in the role of leader), leadership can be distributed/shared[^4] and then rhythmics need to be tracked in relation to the agent becoming established in the role — but the roles of leaders will be performed by different agents, creating an "atmosphere" making it impossible for the target agent to avoid being set in the role, and it is also necessary 5) to consider the time of establishing this "atmosphere" of distributed leadership, which can be quite significant — because some method leadership variants need to be taught to most employees.

But here is also the output to a higher systemic level org-link = personality in an org-link = team and even org-link = "team of teams"/collective. Methods here will be different for each duration/rhythm/cadence levels (keeping attention during reasoning about the role/in-role of the agent-person as an actor needs one way/method/practice/culture, and working with a team already others, similarly "establishing a habit of work", organizing one person for work in the role requires one time and one method, but for the team, the time and method are different). One can further increase the time scale and discover that there the method leadership variants change (for example, the idea of distributed leadership did not appear immediately, the previous understanding was leadership as a sole management of people), this is the time scale of evolution of methods, time of cultural changes.

For each systemic level in the organization, leadership work is conducted relying on different methods:

-   level of personal culture/style/method of work, considering one person (or one AI-agent) — this is training (with neural networks now — it's prompt engineering). This educational work with humans, considering their neurophysiology and the similarity of such work with AI-agents, is considered in detail in the "Personality Engineering" course,
-   level of corporate culture, collective, working with cultures/styles/methods of behavior in groups — at the core there already are management methods (and at their core — sociology::discipline, study of human behavior in their groups).

**Consideration** **of work methods** **and** **their creator roles should be** **systemic, that is,** **multilevel, and these are levels of both size and duration:**

-   **Different** **work methods with** **sub- and super- systems** **of different** **systemic** **levels** **in** **target systems** **and their environments** **during their creation (some roles make bricks, others build walls from bricks and mortar, third construct houses, fourth develop territories, these roles are divided among different agents with mastery in these work methods)**
-   **Different** **methods** **work with the same objects on different** **time** **scales and can also be divided among different people. Some agents slowly teach other agents craft (e.g., three years learning to dance), then these other agents use this craft in completely different time scales (e.g., dancing a three-minute track at a party, and also applying this taught craft multiple times, e.g., twenty years).

Thinking methods, including systemic thinking itself, can have their nuances at different size and duration scales, but they are transdisciplinary because they are applicable to all scales and help to link reasoning at different scales. This very reasoning about many scales, many levels of sizes and durations, many levels of complexity is precisely systemic thinking as part of the thinking methods of the intelligence stack.

Systemicity always turns out to be 4D, that is, patterned in terms of both spatial forms and temporal sequences. **Design in the creation process** **takes place in classes/patterns of things and rhythms/patterns of changes of things over time. Instances of things during production-according-to-projekt and use** **also exist in space-time, being instances of things taken as examples of implementations of not only classes of these things but also rhythmic classes, forms of unfolding over time,** **templates/patterns of repetition over time — we usually speak of changes-in-time of instances as conducted works, and changes as time patterns —** **as methods/functions. We remember that we can talk about time only through some changes of certain spatial objects —** **discussing moments of time as "events," state changes.**

Why is all this needed? Systemicity is needed to overcome complexity: to present for every practical situation not one super-complex description but many simpler ones, corresponding to familiar (classes!) spatial-temporal parts (physical objects in 4D). Shapes in space, rhythms of changing states of shapes over time. When you get used to this, dealing with complex situations becomes simpler: thinking about very different situations the same way. And this "sameness" substantially accelerates thinking, leaving time for deep reasoning about various surprises and even conducting additional experiments.

If there is no sameness, "everything" will be surprises! In such a situation, it's constantly unclear what to do. Systemic thinking immediately sets the question: at what systemic level are you working and in what role with which method? And the answer should be at not only the "level of substance size", but the "size in time". This standard reasoning: not "what to do at all", but "what is our system, how should it behave in the environment, how should it be arranged, from what and by what methods should it be made, which creators should make it, how to create those creators" — this is the super-shortly expressed same systemic mantra. This typical reasoning will go quickly, and it will immediately be clear what has already been thought through and what has not, and what to do next. This is in a sense also the "rhythm of systemic thinking", constantly spinning cycle, pattern, thinking template.

Attention concerning "part-whole" highlights patterns from the background not only in 3D (pulling out parts of space), moreover hierarchically at different scales. Attention hierarchically highlights concerning part-whole patterns from the background in 4D (pulling out parts of space-time): besides shapes, we also deal with rhythms there. And this is also about systems and their behavior, this is systemic thinking too. **If nothing repeats over time in your life, it means you are doing something very wrong, living in chaos. Life and work — they are rhythmic!**