---
title: Division of labor among creators. Our system. Creation graph.
---

The peculiarity of systemic consideration is that objects of all systemic
levels exist and interact at the moment of operation **of our target system.**
In **our** example of social dances from previous sections, the target system was implicitly set as the performance of a specific task by creating a salsa performance executed by a pair of artists::roles, utilizing their sub-role as salsero and dance sub-roles of leader and follower. The artists are a pair of human-agents (one agent in the role of leader, the other in the role of follower) in one of the Moscow clubs.

But it’s not a fact that the course author specified exactly “a pair of artists” as the target system in any project! And it is unlikely that the author wrote this text as an ambassador of the subculture, calling the target system the salsa community (often referred to as the “salsa dancers community”, although we remember that besides salseros, there are quite a few other roles— event organizers, DJs, photographers) as part of the social dance community!

On the other hand, the text is very convenient for choosing some target system: all possible roles as candidates in target systems are laid out clearly. At the same time, we are talking about dancing time (not preparation/creation of the dance performance). During this time, the systemic levels exist and work simultaneously for the roles of the agents participating in the dance, but different roles around the target system focus their attention on different objects, each at its systemic level (some roles are also roles of teachers::creators, they do not participate in the dance!). What happens at other systemic levels during the dance performance (using the skill that is taught) is considered by these roles of the creators, but not at the center of their attention, not the subject of interest.

Knowing the existence of multiple systemic levels in various systems allows us to divide a complex project of creating and developing some systems into numerous separate projects, each executed by some separate roles, and assign roles to different agents.

A brick manufacturer (factory! But we referred to it simply by the role) takes clay, makes bricks. A mason (person! But we referred to him simply by the role) makes a wall out of the bricks. The foreman (a person in the role of manager, here a position is mentioned) creates a building from the walls, coordinating (“work assignments”::method by the manager::role, keeping in mind that in everyday speech the types of meta-meta-model are not articulated) the masons under his position. The developer (company) creates an entire residential area out of the buildings, the construction/development of which is coordinated by the foremen. A construction developer (company) creates some development zone out of the residential areas, and the city architect (a department of the mayor’s office as an institution) creates a city from these development zones (either from scratch or by modernizing an existing one).

This was all a description of projects happening with systems of different systemic levels. Different agents (humans, AIs, and their organized groups) mentioned in the previous paragraph work with the city in different roles at different systemic levels: some with the city as a whole, some with the buildings of the city, some with the clay of the bricks of the city. Although the phrase “clay of the bricks of the city” already “doesn’t sound right,” by systemic levels bricks and especially the clay of the bricks are far from the city. Usually, **phrases where** **systems of adjacent systemic levels are connected make sense, not those far apart in** **the hierarchy of system composition relationships**. “Clay of the bricks” (here a composition/“part-whole” relationship!) or “buildings of the district” (here also a composition/“part-whole” relationship!) are much more meaningful, as these are systems of adjacent systemic levels.

We have already mentioned this feature of systemic thinking when discussing the tail of Margarita’s cow, which itself is part of the herd. Saying, “the tail is part of the herd” is correct for mathematics and physics, but incorrect for systemic thinking. Saying that “dancing is biochemical processes in muscles” is formally correct, but incorrect for systemic thinking. Saying that a city consists of bricks and concrete panels, and also roads between groups of bricks and groups of concrete panels, is formally correct, but speaking this way in systemic thinking is wrong.

If you understand that creating and developing systems of different systemic levels require different expertise (i.e., thinking systemically), the very first thing to do is to assign the creation of systems of different levels not to one agent, but to an entire group of agents, each of whom manages to acquire deep expertise in their field over a long period of their life and work.

Robert Heinlein wrote: “A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an invasion, butcher a hog, design a building, sail a ship, write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve equations, analyze a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer, cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently, die gallantly. Specialization is for insects”^[Robert Heinlein, “Time Enough for Love,” 1973].

This aphorism can be understood as a hymn to human intellect: potentially, yes, any person can master all these methods, even “pitching manure” (including on an industrial scale^[<https://direct.farm/post/vneseniye-organicheskikh-udobreniy-5847>], not just on an amateur gardening scale^[<https://navozov.ru/blog/navoz-kak-udobrenie-vidy-i-sposoby-primeneniya/>]). But, unfortunately, over a human lifetime, it is impossible to learn to work professionally by all these methods, and also impossible to keep up with all changes in continuously improving work methods to maintain one’s expertise as up-to-date. The solution here is **division of labor,** the usual path of civilization. One “non-divisible into specific methods” method/task/practice/activity/occupation, which was performed by one person in the past, today begins to be performed well if this performance is conducted by a dozen or more different roles, each specializing different agents (humans and AIs, and even entire organizations). These agents also involve various increasingly specialized tools for performing these rapidly diverging roles. In these more and more narrow methods/“types of labor/activity/engineering,” individual and collective agents achieve high levels of mastery, as they have enough time to achieve this mastery, focusing on performing one narrow work method, they have time for:

- **Development**—changing the mastery of one generation of a method to the mastery of a new generation of the method, for example, transitioning from the method “programming in Fortran in the 1980s” to the method “programming in Matlab” in the early 21st century, and then to the method “programming in Julia” in the 2020s. Development is “learning to do something new,” implying two methods: the old one (possibly absent if “never did this before”) and the new one.
- **Improvement**—achieving a high level of proficiency, fluency in performing work by some method of the current generation, “getting the knack.” For example, after transitioning from one programming language to another as “development,” i.e., changing the work method (and the knowledge/discipline and tools), you still need to spend time on improvement/“fluency and errorlessness” in using that language, “training” already existing mastery, reducing the percentage of errors and increasing the speed of what you already know how to do. Improvement is about one method, which needs not only to be learned but also to achieve a high level of expertise in it.

In the example of social dances from previous sections, it describes modern division of labor: there is no single “creator of an artist's skill.” Agents dancing salsa in a club have many different creators performing various roles—from doctors through fitness trainers/instructors and dance teachers to dance style gurus and choreographers. But at a higher level (creating and developing parties::events), the diversity of roles is even higher: the uppermost roles are event organizers, photographers and videographers, artists for shows, and teachers for master classes (often held right at the parties), and animators for line dances. Even higher are roles of cultural ambassadors, and these can also be separate agents professionalizing in this role.

**Depth of division of labor** refers to the number of levels of sub-roles into which the initial role is divided and the number of sub-roles at each level, delegated to different agents for subsequent collective performance of the initial role. Labor division turns out to be quite deep even in dancing! There is already a departure from the situation where “one dance teacher teaches one dancer.” No, the preparation of one dancer-artist involves many creator-agents specializing in different areas. Personality engineering (the engineering of skill sets in a person) requires no fewer participants with different specializations than the engineering of some software or hardware “iron” system (e.g., a robot).

Systemic levels are useful precisely because they allow discussing:
who::creator what::system does what, what can be omitted and what cannot be omitted. All of this will be simplified (modeling leaves only what’s important!) categorized and documented (we don't trust the brain, it’s forgetful, trust what’s recorded), making the ultra-complex more straightforward.

Thus, an ultra-complex city can be discussed as consisting of districts/development zones, districts as consisting of buildings, buildings as consisting of walls, and no mishmash like “districts of walls.” With a city, it’s easy to understand the concept of systemic levels; with a dance party, it’s harder; with an enterprise—even harder. But it’s still possible to understand a business::creator::system and the systems it produces::“target system;” the thinking about the enterprise will be the same: different systemic levels of the systems produced by the enterprise and the systems of the subsystems of these levels (and external roles for the enterprise are also engaged in creating super-systems). The main thing is that understanding the activities of various agents in enterprises as collective agents is possible: just remember the division of labor, therefore build reflections from the target system (necessarily in its environment!) at the moment of its operation to the target system of constructs, then the methods of creating a whole system of constructs, then the roles for these methods, and further—agents with the necessary level of expertise, and then agents organizing agent-employees. We observe agents with everyday attention to the enterprise, and systemic thinking tells what the trajectory of attention to objects related to the enterprise should be if using systemic modeling. Since there are many objects, it is proposed to document the results of systemic modeling, not limit to “thinking in the mind,” “thinking by speaking,” and even “thinking by writing,” but conduct “systemic thinking by modeling.”

This is **the charm of systemic thinking: once understood, you use it** **for all different systems you encounter.** **To outside agents, these systems may seem completely different, but to a systemic thinker, all these systems are quite similar,** **his thinking about these systems is fluent, he only deals with applied nuances of the project situation, and in general terms, any project situation looks the same to him, he already knows about what’s happening there at the level of knowledge of the meta-meta-model, “in general terms.” This saves a lot, a lot of time! A systemic thinker always has a checklist: what to pay attention to in an unfamiliar situation. Therefore, truly unfamiliar situations do not occur, there is no confusion before the chaos of the surrounding world.**

Absolutely no matter what system it is, if we are talking about systemic thinking. Thinking will be arranged the same way; attention will be held by systemic levels, although the content of thinking will be entirely different for different types of systems, different systemic levels. The types of meta-meta-model are the same (thinking is carried out in types! A meta-meta-model is the types from our course, the types of fundamental disciplines/concept explanations of the intelligence stack), but the types of meta-model (subject area, metaU-model from a general textbook of some discipline, metaS-model situational, as formed in some organization and reflected, for example, in regulations and corporate standards) will differ significantly.

An example of a space rocket is easier to understand than a dance example because a rocket is not alive and does not learn, although AI in a modern rocket is already, likely, not learning in the same way as human-agents in the dance example. But the thinking about a spacecraft is arranged the same way as thinking about dancers: if the hull of the spacecraft is made from a material improper for the success of the system (for example, aluminum), you need to go down to the level of considering the material and solve the problem (for example, take steel^[<https://worldsteel.org/steel-stories/innovation/spacex-relies-on-stainless-steel-for-starship-mars-rocket/>], as SpaceX did with the Starship rocket). Otherwise, due to material problems, the operation of all other higher systemic levels of the rocket will be disrupted, it won’t fly, or it will fly unreliably.

Problems arise due to the improper joint operation of many systemic levels, we remember about conflicts of systems of different systemic levels. Usually, tasks to be solved in the course of creating and developing systems come from higher levels, ultimately from the super-system, which requires the target system to perform some function—and this consideration goes down many levels.

A rocket gets its function to fly with certain characteristics from a higher systemic level. For example, one could consider a space company like SpaceX, setting tasks for the rocket and spacecraft linkage, or a customer of spacecraft flights from such a company, for example, a telecommunications company wishing to launch a satellite. But to accomplish such a mission, many problems must be solved at lower systemic levels (there are quite a few: what material to use for the engine nozzles? What to cool these nozzles with? How should the pumps be designed?), coordinate the interaction of all parts of the rocket, and parts of these parts down to the level of raw materials (what materials to use for the rocket pumps? And pipelines?). To figure out that many currently solved problems are not the problems that need solving (they are unimportant, solving them gives nothing!), you need to ascend many levels and then descend again through systemic levels to find the truly important solutions. Also, remember that the system's design should reflect multi-level optimization, not single-level optimization. It’s silly to make the rocket body from steel and have a margin of strength at high temperatures, and then not use this margin of strength! All system configuration optimizations are multi-level.

A useful exercise here is to imagine an airliner as 6 million individual parts flying at the same speed of 890 km/h in one direction at an altitude of 10 km. It's a joke, but it’s also the pure truth! Without considering different systemic levels, remaining a reductionist, one has to think of the plane this way: 6 million parts assembled together and now flying coherently at ten kilometers altitude. Remember the picture of neatly laid out parts of a disassembled car; discussing the car's operation cannot be done by discussing its parts and their interaction! It is impossible to organize the production of a car or plane if considering a single-level breakdown “car—all its parts listed.” It is impossible to organize an enterprise by considering it, for example, as “enterprise—all its people listed.”

If we use systemic thinking, we can organize the work of about half a million people in various factories and design bureaus worldwide, who manufacture this assembly of 6 million parts we call “an airliner.” Systemic thinking uses systemic levels to not lose any part in systemic breakdown but to deal each time with a limited number of part-subsystems at each systemic level in each system.

Of course, in the case of an airliner and an enterprise (and indeed, today in fact of any other system), systemic breakdown descriptions are supported by a computer, the collective attention of these project teams can only be maintained using a computer. Even reverting to paper engineering work will not develop and manufacture a successful system of such scales. Hence, systemic thinking largely reduces to systemic computer modeling, without a computer it’s simply impossible to maintain attention in the project, **systemic thinking requires technically provided focus.** **If you aren't recording modeling results, you aren't thinking systemically!**

Environment, including the super-system, as well as the target system and its subsystems, are included in one systemic breakdown, the levels of which are determined at the moment when the target system exists, is ready, and operates, contributing to the emergence of desired systemic properties in the super-system. No system is needed for itself; it is needed only to become part of a super-system! Therefore, systemic thinking always starts with defining the target system as **“black box”** (unclear how arranged object), performing its work in the super-system: the consideration from the target system boundary begins upwards through levels, not down/into the system’s components. Consideration of system parts, knowledge of subsystems, is a consideration of **“transparent box”**, which has known components and how they interact. The consideration of the arrangement/composition of the target system, i.e., the passage from the system boundary down through systemic levels, is always the second step. The first step is a “black box” in the systemic environment, the second step is a “transparent box.” And this applies to systems at each systemic level—many levels up and down.

**Creators::system** deal/interact with the target system as it is gradually (previously thought to be “at once,” now systems evolve, not “born, live, die”) conceived, designed, manufactured, liquidated. If it’s about the creation and development time of the system, systems changing the descriptions and materials of the target system to obtain a ready-working system are called creators/“creating systems”^[in earlier course versions these were “support systems,” enabling was conveyed as [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/обеспечение](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/обеспечение)—stress can be placed in two ways: обеспе́чение or обеспече́ние.] (enabling systems per ISO 15288:2023, constructors in physics). These systems gradually (during “continuous everything”—continuous development, continuous manufacturing, continuous deployment) create and develop the target system. Creators pass increments (system parts containing new functions/features/capabilities) of the target system through various states (increment “conceived,” “designed,” “as purchased raw material,” “manufactured,” “tested,” “accepted for operation”) to readiness for operation/utilization, then remove from operation/utilization, including liquidation (not simple! Example: leaving a “green site” after a full nuclear power plant liquidation), or repair instead of liquidation, or sometimes modify and return to use. More about this discussed in courses “Methodology” and “System Engineering.”

Creators are not part of the target system’s environment (not parts of the target system’s super-systems) and thus not included in one systemic breakdown with the target system, but are part of various other systemic breakdowns. Why so? The target system itself does not live, feed itself, or grow—it requires creating systems, working during creation and development. And the environment? These are all systems surrounding the target system in its configuration (remember, the system evolves, so its configuration as composition changes—look at