---
title: 'First generation of systems approach: system in its environment during operations'
---

**First generation of systems approach** emerged in the 1940s mainly as a result of von Bertalanffy's work^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Bertalanffy>]. The concept of a system as a subject of consideration, separated from its environment, appeared in physics a long time ago, but systems approach as viewing the whole world as interacting systems emerged mainly after von Bertalanffy's work on **general systems theory**. **Approach** is a common term for the situation when ontology, successfully developed and tested in one **domain**, begins to be used in various other domains. The key here was the realization that systems are interacting **holons** (Koestler introduced this term to describe the **part of a whole**, which itself **consists of** parts^[Koestler, Arthur (1967). The Ghost in the Machine]), plus these systems somehow appear in the world and then disappear from the world, that is, they go through the usual **life cycle** for biology. Von Bertalanffy was a biologist and generalized the successes of applying systems approach in biology, that is the life cycle --- this is the cycle of birth-growth-reproduction and, separately, death (which after reproduction already does not affect the genome, therefore it may not be considered in evolution, but it is necessarily considered in techno-evolution). The interaction of **system parts** during **operations** results in **emergent properties** of the whole. The gears in a clock do not show the time, the clock shows the time, a house with a clock inside no longer shows the time. The key here was that the first generation of systems thinking operated with at least two different ways of partitioning into parts, depending on the time of consideration:

-   **Functional partitioning** depending on the purpose of the system in the supersystem and the purpose of the subsystems in the system. It implied considering the system during its operations.
-   **Constructive/modular partitioning**, needed for considering the **time of creation** of the system.

The difficulties in mastering **systems thinking** were mainly that it was hard for people to grasp the concept of focusing on dynamic objects in the world --- right during the system's operations. Most often, when mentioning parts-wholes, they imagined a **"blow-up diagram"**^[Bellami, Nikon F3-P Parts Diagram, <https://www.japancamerahunter.com/2014/11/nikon-f3-p-parts-diagram/>], at the same time losing the **multi-level** nature of such **partitioning**. It is clear that one cannot discuss emergent properties of a stopped and broken down into single-level physical constructive parts system, because interaction --- this is operations time and the consideration should be functional. But partitioning into constructive parts is also important because such a system needs to be **created**. For example, scissors functionally consist of a cutting block and a handle, and constructively consist of two halves of the scissors and a screw that holds them together. At the same time, the user is **interested in** the functional consideration, and the factory engineer --- in the constructive.

Bertalanffy included **systems engineering** in the set of systems disciplines he proposed, which developed rapidly. In systems engineering, the target systems were physical: this provided guaranteed **grounding**^[<https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/grounding/>] for all descriptions. At the same time, the **descriptions themselves were not considered as a system**, the **interaction** (i.e., changes over time due to each other) of parts of the descriptions, which would give **emergence**, strictly could not be discussed, **formalism** could not be built --- **mereotopological** considerations of **mental/abstract/mathematical objects** mostly ended in failure.