---
title: Systemic thinking as strong/universal/general
---

Let's continue with a brief summary of the material without lengthy explanations and examples: we simply provide this as a reference material so you can assess the set of concepts in which it is convenient to discuss systemic thinking among other types of thinking. Of course, later in our course, there will be detailed explanations and examples, and in subsequent courses on these topics, there will be exhaustive information and references to primary sources. Do not get stuck on a detailed understanding of the synopsis content in this section—use it for a general acquaintance with the topic.

Thinking can be **strong/universal/general** (intelligence thinking, not limited to a subject area) and **narrow/non-universal/applied** — thinking about objects of some narrow subject area (growing oilseeds in general and sunflower in particular, performing optical computations, learning horse riding). These concepts are close to how intelligence itself is defined: strong (comparable to human, potentially universal in relation to the subject area) and applied — and here are the debates about whether to consider narrow intelligence as true intelligence or to refer to it simply as some kind of applied skill. This is not important to us right now, as we define intelligence as a set of a special kind of skills — the skill of conducting thinking through a set of **fundamental/transdisciplinary** thinking methods, which ensure the universality of intelligence. Therefore, the discussions about applied skills (skills that can conduct thinking based on applied theories/disciplines/knowledge) follow the same line as fundamental thinking skills, that is, intelligence.

**The set of thinking methods followed by** **strong/general** **intelligence constitutes the** **intelligence stack**. Stack (like in “stack of paper sheets”) means that each thinking method and its knowledge/theory/“scientific/academic discipline” and tools (usually modeling tools—modeler) higher in the stack is easier to explain using methods lower in the stack.

Here are the fundamental thinking methods of the intelligence stack from top to bottom, named by “scientific/academic disciplines”/“explanatory theories”/“kinds/areas of knowledge”: **engineering,** **methodology, rhetoric, ethics, aesthetics,** **cognition/research, rationality, logic, algorithmics, ontology, theory of concepts, physics, mathematics, semantics, coherence, concept formation.**

Thinking methods (and their knowledge/theories/disciplines) of the intelligence stack are **fundamental** (that is, they “underlie” the applied thinking using the concepts of applied thinking methods' disciplines). The fundamentality of the thinking methods of the intelligence stack and the concepts given for them by theories/disciplines grows towards the bottom of the stack. The lower in the intelligence stack, the more fundamental the thinking methods and their disciplines are, their concepts are more abstract compared to the concepts of applied disciplines, and it is harder to understand their influence on a particular situation. But this is the secret: these fundamental thinking methods are helpful when facing **problems** — situations where it is unclear what to do: what and by what applied method to change in the physical world to improve it, it is unclear what to think about, objects of which subject area. The most abstract thinking about objects, about methods to change objects, about organizing collective thinking and collective work is needed.

Such situations, when it is necessary to employ intelligence and thus methods of thinking from the intelligence stack are common. Problems do not exist only for those who do nothing, but only at first. In the second moment, idlers will receive their unpleasant surprises from the surrounding environment; the surrounding world never sleeps.

Theories/disciplines of the intelligence stack, enhancing intelligence (that is, making it more universal in thinking subjects and faster by using improved algorithms on which thinking relies), affect the work with applied methods, helping to understand their concepts.

The visible part of a master's thinking, as the work of all his skills (including applied, intelligence, self-care), is applied thinking. Someone knows how to build a house, someone knows how to repair a synchrotron. The results of applied thinking are recognizable, well visible! But there is an invisible part in thinking: this is the manifestation of the strength of intelligence as the ability to quickly and universally solve previously unencountered problems, **“translate problems/problems** **into tasks/tasks.”**

**A task** is a unit of work with a known method/way of this work and known required resources that can be assigned to one creator with access to the resources and proficient in the method. A significant part of strong intelligence is the mastery of **strategizing**: a method for finding a suitable strategy to overcome the problem :: "work method", and after creating a strategy (selected method for overcoming the problem)—the mastery of planning as drawing up a plan for using resources-constructs to implement the strategy in the form of a set of tasks, the execution of which implements the strategy and thereby overcomes the initial problem.

Systemic thinking belongs to intelligence thinking; it shows in overcoming problems, not obtaining any clear results. With mastering systemic thinking, you **will** **become** **smarter** (your **intelligence will become stronger**), but this does not mean you have learned to do some specific work: being a good manager, singer, or heat engineer. No, you will simply overcome problems you encounter more quickly (including problems you will encounter in management, singing, heat engineering), but you will have to learn the applied working methods separately.

You will learn some general working methods (systems engineering, personal engineering as training, organizational engineering as systemic management) in our next courses. At the same time, we will clearly distinguish: if your question is about how to make systemic descriptions "in general," this is a question for the course on systemic thinking. If the question is how to make systemic descriptions of an organization — you need the systemic management course, if you need to describe a skill systemically — you need the personal engineering course. But if so, why the systemic thinking course? It tells about the very type of "systemic description" and what should be there. This is a course in type meta-meta-models, and applied courses (including software engineering, personal engineering, organizational engineering) are courses in type meta-models. In life, however, to solve problems and check for gross errors, it is necessary to typify the concepts of a meta-model (subject area) with types of a meta-meta-model, that is, types of fundamental methods of the intelligence stack. If your organizational model suddenly stopped being systemic, you will not learn this from the systemic management course, nor from the software system architecture creation in the software engineering course (although we do touch on this matter in the systems engineering course, we refer to the literature specifically on software engineering). Do not expect answers to questions about applied working methods from fundamental courses, including the systemic thinking course.

Fundamental courses serve other purposes. **Thanks to systemic** **thinking, completely unfamiliar situations will become somehow familiar.** People not familiar with systemic thinking will see a web of closely interconnected incomprehensible and hard-to-distinguish-from-the-environment objects, but you as an adept of systemic thinking will see a set of slightly familiar, but systems (this type is from the meta-meta-model of our course), linked not “somehow” but more-or-less comprehensibly (with understandable relationships: composition, creation). And then you will understand faster, as if an unfamiliar situation will be partially familiar to you: you will know the types of important objects of this situation, and therefore you can reason sensibly.

If you have a managerial problem, you use organizational engineering, and organizational engineering engages systems engineering, which engages methodology, and as a manager, you will use a technique and solve ethical problems, think rationally and logically. Rarely does anyone note that the activity of an agent in the role of a manager involves organizational engineering. It is not emphasized that the personality of this agent thinks logically and is guided in their decisions by the latest achievements in ethics. But this doesn't mean that everything happens like that in life. The agent-manager with stronger intelligence will be the better manager: they will simply learn the necessary applied methods when encountering problems. Systemic thinking will help with this. An agent was usually an adult (not a three-year-old child), but today such an agent can be AI, or it could be a whole organization of people and artificial intelligences.

Thus, thinking methods of the intelligence stack (physics, math, logic, methodology, etc.) are used in the most diverse applied fields, from musical composition to robotics. We will be less concerned with full methods of thinking of the intelligence stack (including not only theories/knowledge/disciplines but also tooling to support thinking). Therefore, it is often said not about the thinking methods of the intelligence stack but only about the disciplines/theories/knowledge of the intelligence stack. Moreover, methods are mostly named after their theories/knowledge/“academic/scientific disciplines,” and not tools/equipment (although there are exceptions like “microscopy”)^[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microscopy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microscopy)], and this is not accidental. The tooling supporting the theory/discipline of a method can be easily replaced (for example, one modeler replaced with a completely different one), while the supporting theory/discipline remains.

**Systemic thinking defined by intelligence stack methods** **is universal,** **fundamental,** **scaleless:** **engaged in** **thinking about the most diverse** **applied** **subject areas.**

Mastery in thinking according to the methods of the intelligence stack is necessary for solving problems that the owner of intelligence has not encountered before. Applied working methods help solve tasks that the owner of intelligence has already dealt with. But as soon as a situation in life somehow differs from the situation described in the applied method or its explanations/disciplines (be it plumbing, instrument engineering, or genetically modified fish farming), it will require employing intelligence — to figure out what the difference is and how to solve the emerging problem.

Intelligence, enhanced by fundamental knowledge/theories/disciplines, **is universal**, since it helps to cope with problems in the most diverse applied subject areas, from animal husbandry to rocket engineering. Therefore, explanations/disciplines of the intelligence stack practices are often called **transdisciplines**, these are “disciplines for reasoning in the course of engaging applied methods” (trans-— “lying beyond” applied disciplines, more precisely, disciplines of applied methods). An overview of the modern content of transdisciplines will be in the "Intelligence Stack" course.

These fundamental knowledge/disciplines are **scaleless,** unlike the knowledge of applied disciplines which are tied to certain scales in space and time. The term “scaleless/scaleless/scale-free” came from physics and is used concerning disciplines/knowledge/explanatory theories, where their applicability doesn't depend on the size of the discussed objects. Fundamental disciplines allow reasoning about elementary particles, people, airliners, mountains, quasars, and galaxies. Systemic thinking within these fundamental/transdisciplines is not only universal in terms of subject areas dealing with different properties of physical world objects but also scaleless in terms of reasoning about the most diverse situations in the physical world, considered at different size scales — from the microworld of subatomic particles to the cosmic world of galactic clusters, as well as the most diverse time scales — from femtosecond light pulses in lasers to the billions of years that biological evolution lasted.

**Applied** **disciplines/knowledge/explanatory theories** use the concepts (types of the meta-meta-model) of transdisciplines of the intelligence stack to discuss methods of working with systems as physical objects, divided into levels of some specific scale/size. These levels “by scale/size” are called **system** **levels**. Small molecules make up larger cells, small cells make up big organisms, many different organisms make up huge populations — this is the division of living nature systems into system levels. From screws and metal parts, we assemble avionics, from avionics, fuselages, and wings — airplanes, from airplanes and airports — air transport. These are system levels in engineering.

Different applied working methods deal with the laws of behavior of systems from different system levels. Molecular biology deals with proteins, motor engineering — with motors, aircraft construction — with airplanes. These are the system levels dealt with by applied **methods/practices/styles/cultures** of engineering. **Engineering** changes the physical world for the better, applying thinking about certain types of systems to changing the physical world for creating and developing **target systems** — motors, airplanes, cows, enterprises, and even societies. For instance, classical systems engineering — is the engineering of cyber-physical systems (robots, airliners), medicine — is the engineering (now mainly repair) of human beings, training — is the engineering (mainly development/modernization) of a personality, management — is the engineering of organizations.

Strong intelligence implements the ideas of "saving" **agents**, who, with their engineering, change the world to eliminate problems now and prevent them in the future. Intelligence can be present in anything (agents in a broad sense), only to different extents. But so far, intellectual agents are only educated people and modern AI systems are approaching them. People also form organizations together with AI agents. Humanity has processed about 50 kg of material per each square meter of the earth's surface, to avoid starving, freezing, suffering from diseases, being eaten by wild animals and even being destroyed by fellow tribesmen. Not dying from hunger and cold is more of a task now, not a problem. With diseases, it depends on the disease, treating some diseases is still a problem, others already a task, but biological immortality is still a problem. Elimination by fellow tribesmen is also still a problem, although the situation is much better than a couple of thousand years ago.

The meaning of life is to "be saved" in the evolutionary sense of the word. **Live now and in the future, for this, arm yourself with knowledge** **of the most diverse work methods** **and** **then conduct work using the knowledge and** **tooling** **of work methods in engineering projects to create various systems.**

**Systemic thinking** **is** **thinking based on knowledge/theories/disciplines** **of methods** **of the intelligence stack,** **which** **are responsible for thinking about problems, translating problems into tasks** **and** **in this thinking about problems and methods of their solving** **using the concepts of a systemic approach.**

Knowledge for solving tasks usually exists, knowledge for solving problems does not. Intelligence provides thinking using “knowledge about knowledge,” “transdisciplinary knowledge about applied disciplines.” We remember that often methods/ways/cultures/styles of work are discussed apart from their tooling — as their applied knowledge/disciplines. The systemic approach is part of such knowledge, that is, part of the “knowledge about knowledge.” Systemic approach as explanations based on a set of meta-meta-model concepts is contained in the discipline/theory/knowledge of intelligence stack thinking methods. But we also understand that bare hands and bare brains do not work, tools are utilized. Therefore, systemic thinking requires not only mastery in using the brain as thinking hardware but also mastery in using tools — modelers working with various system descriptions.

The systemic approach turned out to be so important in engineering that in its most general variant engineering began to be called **systems engineering**. Indeed, modern methodology can be safely called “systems methodology” because it also substantially employs the idea of the systemic approach, and physics uses the concept of "system" as one of the main ones, and the term itself came from there. The other thing is, physics is not called "systemic," systems are familiar there.

But "systems biology" is the engineering of artificial life, the word "systems" there basically meaning "created living objects," because **in everyday life, the word “system” is often used to mean anything that is sufficiently complex, and it has little to** **do with the term from systemic thinking. “The system cat went behind the system corner”** **is everyday language, not the language of systemic** **thinking concepts.** The type "system" can be easily removed, it adds nothing here.

**So:**

-   **Intelligence** **is the mastery** **in methods** **of turning problems, which it is unclear how to overcome, into tasks that just need to be done.**
-   **Thinking** **is a function of intelligence, its behavior, what intelligence does.** **Essentially, thinking** **is the computation of intelligence, so that computation can be done according to some thinking methods. Thinking methods that lead to intelligence enhancement** **make up the intelligence stack.**
-   **Systemic thinking** **is a subset of thinking,** **dealing with** **the emergence** **of new properties of a whole object-system** **(emergence)** **resulting** **from the interactions** **of parts** **of these whole** **objects.** **Systemic thinking is based on the concepts of a systemic approach.**