---
title: Different ways of thinking
---

There are two main civilizational paths, conventionally called "Eastern" and "Western." **Conditional** **"Easternness"** consists in recognizing the unfathomable complexity of the world, the inexpressibility, and incommunicability of human experience in understanding this world. **Conditional** **"Westernness"** relies on rationality. Rationality---comes from the Latin ratio, meaning "reason," "explanation," but also "relation," i.e., associated with division into parts, analysis. Of course, rational (logical, non-intuitive, non-"Eastern" type) thinking equally helps in synthesizing, combining the analytically torn apart parts into a whole. But in Western culture, historically, great importance is attached to logic-based "analytics," i.e., formalization and modeling. Rationality---is one of the methods of thinking within the intellect stack, more about rationality is taught in the course "Intellect Stack." Formalization and modeling in rationality are done based on stated guesses-explanations about what is happening in the subject area, and are not derived "empirically" from some observations, so rationality is not only opposed to the Eastern tradition of "unfathomability" but also to the Western tradition of "relying on experience, observations, the derivability of explanations from observations." These guesses can then be criticized, and decisions about actions to improve the world, "salvation," are made based on the guesses that survive the criticism about how the world works. Decision theory is studied as part of rationality theories. The proposal of the concept of a "system" as crucial for describing the world is precisely a move towards rational cognition/knowledge extraction/learning/cognition.

The results of this "Western" path of civilizational development can be observed. It is Western civilization that gave modern science and engineering, computer-based management, the stock market as an infrastructure for reallocating investments in support of new methods of work^[Read more about the advantages of rationality over the Eastern reliance on intuition and "immediate knowledge" in the texts by A.Levenchuk "On articulated and holographic in sociology" <http://ailev.livejournal.com/1281819.html> and "On intuition and insight" <http://ailev.livejournal.com/1295595.html>.], that is, investments in training agents in new skills, producing new tools.

Unfortunately, rational and logical thinking, as well as many other thinking methods applicable to various problem-solving situations, are not directly taught in schools and universities today.

Today, among school and university educators, the prevailing opinion is that some "good" or "strong" thinking (and don't ask what this is! Educators won't have an answer!) can be learned based on in-depth acquaintance with the subjects of so-called **STEM**^[Definition of STEM: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Science,_technology,_engineering,_and_mathematics>]: science, technology, engineering, mathematics. Unfortunately, educators' assumptions about indirectly teaching thinking through STEM subjects do not hold true, each thinking method needs to be taught directly, not indirectly^[Lei Bao and others have shown that reasoning ability and thinking training based on a set of concepts are not the same thing, <http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0807/0807.2061.pdf>. The study of physics turns out to be not so "mind-adjusting" --- A historically held belief among educators and researchers is that training in physics, which has a beautiful structure of logical and mathematical relations, would in general improve students' abilities in conducting reasoning that is intellectually challenging. However, the result from this study suggests that training in physics content knowledge in the traditional format alone is not enough to improve students' general reasoning abilities).]. If you were taught to solve physics problems, you won't be able to think universally, but only solve these physics problems. If you were taught to solve math problems, this thinking ability does not transfer to other subject areas, you won't be able to reason better about dancing or rocket launching. So the methods of thinking of the intellect stack, including rationality, need to be taught directly, not "indirectly" through teaching other working methods.

For example, if logic needs to be taught, then it should be taught directly, not through computer science and geometry. In school courses, logic remains only within the framework of studying logical expressions in programming and in geometry, where only theorem proof remains.

Our course on systems thinking is intended to fill this gap in teaching thinking using methods of the intellect stack, although partially, as it touches on a small area of explanations of a few disciplines related to the concept of "system," and not the full set of intellect stack methods. Our course teaches directly systems thinking as the use of systemic approach concepts in various thinking methods, although it does not address many other concepts from these thinking methods. For example, the hierarchy in terms of composition/part-whole in the course of systems thinking is more or less detailed, but other types of relations are only mentioned. In modeling courses (for example, "Rational Work," where ontological thinking is studied in detail), thinking operations with hierarchies in terms of both composition and various other relations, primarily classification (type assignment), specialization (subtype assignment), as well as the use of modeling tools, are studied. In the course of systems thinking, these type assignment operations are not studied but simply used, considered known from previous courses. At the same time, there are enough repetitions of these operations usage in our course for you to understand and practice fluency in using the knowledge gained in the course "Rational Work" about these operations working with types and relationship hierarchies.

So, once again (this was already discussed in the first section, and more detailed in the course "Intellect Stack"):

-   Intelligence---is the thinking skill of solving problems that neither students nor their teachers have encountered before. It is the thinking skill of knowing, endlessly solving more and more complex problems, ultimately leading to survival through evolution (that is, the survival of both an individual organism right now and the survival of the genome in the evolutionary future). Solving a problem involves proposing a method to reduce the problem to tasks that have a method of solution, so intelligence actually creates new working methods.
-   Function:: behavior/behavior of intelligence---thinking. A computer computes, but intelligence thinks, thinking is a class of computations. If we know how to solve a particular task (not a problem! A problem is when we do not know how to solve it!), then we do not think, we simply reason by the rules/algorithms/disciplines of a particular method known to us (besides knowledge/algorithms, a method usually provides for the involvement of some tools, for example, a modeler for thinking or even using AI to carry out part of the reasoning). Without involving intelligence, there will be applied reasoning/computation/inference by the applied method.
-   Intelligence/thinking skill is a cumulative set of different types of thinking skills, both activity/practical/practical computing units, following algorithms/knowledge/theories from thinking methods. Each specific type of skill is a specialized computing unit, implemented today in its strongest/universal forms by a trained wet or silicon neural network of a human or a computer. Thus, thinking is computing by some method, largely neural network-based, hence difficult to discuss as "algorithmic," it often occurs not in local/symbolic representations, but distributed ones. But the difficulty of presenting in symbols does not mean it's "getting information from space/vacuum"! No esotericism!
-   Each method/practice/culture/style/activity of intellect thinking---is fundamental/scale-free. It includes theory/knowledge as a transdiscipline (transdiscipline---is theory/knowledge/explanations/algorithms, used in various other applied methods). The methods of intellect thinking make up the intellect stack (since we conditionally consider them ordered to the extent that explanations of some methods make it easier to explain other methods). Apart from transdiscipline/"fundamental knowledge," a method/practice of intellect thinking implies the use of some tools to support this transdiscipline, as thinking extends beyond a particular computing unit (extended cognition, knowledge extends beyond the cognizer). Previously, the tool for enhancing thinking for fundamental thinking methods was a pen and paper, but now it is more often a computer with some modeling programs/modelers. And in the case of applied methods, in addition to computer-based modelers, tools changing the physical world will also be involved. This can be an excavator or a CNC machine, but in the simplest cases, human hands are enough. Even "observation" is a separate action, for this, a telescope on a satellite can be used, but muscles turning eyes can be sufficient. Thinking::computation thus is a function/method/practice of skill::computing unit work, including the involvement of explanations/theories/algorithms (algorithms are not necessarily step-by-step/imperative) from the transdisciplines of intellect stack thinking methods, and implies support from modeling tools and can even include world alterations during measurements or the creation of new tools to extract data. The ultimate goal of thinking as an intelligence function is to create applied methods that allow work to change the surrounding physical world for the better, for example, creating comfortable cities, ultra-fast quantum computers, healthy immortal bodies (including one's own), an abundance of tasty and healthy inexpensive food. **Fundamental methods of the intellect stack allow reasoning about applied methods and creating them as needed, then the newly learned applied skill knowledge of these newly created applied methods** **engages tools (sometimes already known, sometimes specially developed to support the new method)---** **and changes the world for the better**.
-  Logic, ethics, algorithmicity, rationality, etc., in thinking must be taught through the textbooks and assignments (e.g., modeling assignments) of these thinking methods (drawing on the disciplines/theories/knowledge/explanations of these methods and the tools of these methods, primarily modelers), and not "indirectly" through textbooks and assignments of other subjects. **Learning physics does not provide** **direct knowledge of** **semantics, logic, ontology---** **without this, you won't get smarter!** **Physicists are not smarter, they just know more** **about** **physics!** **Smart are those who possess** **all the thinking methods** **of the intellect stack, which includes physics. At the same time, physics in the intellect stack is included** **not in the part**  **of applied thinking methods** **of any physics sections (optics, mechanics), but in the part of mastering physical thinking** **itself: how to** **think** **about changes in the physical world** **in various situations. For instance, the very concept of** **"system"** **in systems thinking** **once came from such** **physics** **(and not from some "section of physics"): system---** **is a part of the world, somehow separated (boundary of the system) from the rest of the world (the environment).**
-   Methodological/labor/practical/engineering/cultural/stylistic  horizons also need to be taught (for the neural network, this is "broadness of view," a sufficient number of viewed examples), not just acquired "from life experience in enterprises," that is, "indirectly," over a long time. Management, human and AI training horizons---this all needs to be learned, and learned quickly, not just "live long and you'll know everything."
-   The very **systems approach** **(systems approach)---** **is a rational (successful guess, having withstood criticism and taken seriously, that is, as a basis for decision-making about world changes) idea**  **that the whole world consists of** **nested at multiple levels and interacting with each other** **systems** **as physical objects.** **System/system---** **is a fragment of the** **physical** **world taken under consideration within certain boundaries (system boundary), interacting through certain parts** **(subsystems)** **within itself, as well as interacting with the remaining world beyond the boundary** **(boundary)** **of the system** **called the environment.**