---
title: The Composition of Thinking Methods in the Intelligence Stack
---

Here is a brief description of the thinking methods in the intelligence stack in reverse order of their transdisciplines (the methods themselves are usually named after their disciplines/theories, rarely by their tools), from bottom to top, to clarify how explanations/theories of some disciplines use concepts already introduced by other disciplines:

- **Conceptualization** teaches one to distinguish figures from the background and make them objects of consideration. The role of the agent engaged in conceptualization is the **poet**, the "namer." Some of these objects will later turn out to be systems.
- **Concentration** teaches one to maintain attention on "objects" already discussed in conceptualization and provides an understanding of consciousness. The role here is **"concentrated"**, but in the case of a person, a cyborg, as we do not trust the bare brain's attention; we support it at least with pen and paper, but preferably a computer. If you don't write, you don't think.
- **Semantics** teaches one to separate physical objects (handled by physics) from mathematical/abstract/mental/ideal objects (handled by mathematics), thereby dividing objects in the world and objects in their more or less formal descriptions. But these objects can already be held in attention, and for their designation in thinking (concentration has already shown that everything needs to be recorded), signs/symbols are introduced (handled by semiotics, the study of signs). Thus, modern semantics is, in fact, semiotics, the study of meaning and sense of signs, only supplemented by references to mathematics and physics, not just focusing on signs as done in semiotics. Role — **semanticist**.
- **Mathematics** teaches about the types of abstract objects and their relationships, the behavior of abstract objects. Semantics has already talked about their existence. The best systemic descriptions are based on mathematical representations. Mathematics continuously evolves, offering interesting types of mathematical objects that had not been used before. The role utilizing mathematics as a method of mathematical thinking — **mathematician**. These new well-studied mental objects will resemble the real behavior of physical objects in their mental behavior, and mathematical objects will be used by physicists.
- **Physics** teaches the behavior of physical objects represented by mathematical objects. Semantics has already explained that physical objects are represented in thinking by mental/mathematical objects. Physics also addresses questions of the physical-mathematical theory of information: how mathematical objects are represented in the physical world ("mathematician and astrophysicist — physical objects"). It is in **physics** **that the concepts of** **system** **and many other concepts of the systemic approach are introduced for the first time.** Role — **physicist**. Vitaly Vanchurin further distinguishes philosophers and physicists: a physicist gives explanations (since they rely on mathematical objects) where something can then be measured and calculated-predicted, thus verified. A philosopher is free from this, so a physicist can't really make up nonsense, but philosophers can, their reasoning might be entirely disconnected from reality, there can be storytellers among philosophers but not among physicists. The tie to reality in reasoning is paramount for physicists.
- **Theory** **of Concepts** teaches that all objects are similar to one another in some sense, described by types/classes or prototypes. And that we can judge objects by their relationships with one another. Common examples of types of relationships are classification, specialization, and composition. Physics (and the theory of information within it) has already mentioned how all these descriptions are represented in the physical world on information carriers. Ordinary human thinking is "imaginative" thinking based on metaphors. Essentially, modeling is also a metaphor, metaphors are needed to construct convincing speech, and for this, one must understand how to work with prototypes for discussed objects. However, critique requires representations of objects and relationships so that ontology, algorithmics, and logic can then work with them. For this, it is necessary to install a "type machine" in the brain (or AI program) to perform type assignment operations. Role — **typologist**. Naturally, a type is a mathematical object, and maintaining focus on the assigned type will require concentration, for which everything needs to be written down.
- **Ontology** teaches how we multi-level describe/model the world: how we determine what is important and what is not (modeling as the creation of "knowledge graphs" corresponding to concepts and their relationships from the theory of concepts), how we use knowledge graphs for reasoning and explanations. We deal with multi-level meta-modeling (descriptions as abstractions are not arbitrary; abstraction is managed by a higher-level abstraction). Formal ontologies/knowledge graphs expressed with recognized mathematical objects (e.g., logical predicates) and less formal ontics/frameworks expressed in natural language texts utilize concepts (theory of concepts is used) and express properties of the physical world. Role — **ontologist**.
- **Algorithmics** is a natural/experimental science that discusses ways of reasoning with informational models (i.e., methods of computation) we already know from ontology. These reasonings/computations involve objects in different physically universal (all correspond to Turing machines, an important theoretical result of algorithmics) computers (brain, electronic computer, quantum computer, optical computer). Role — **algorithmist**. There are universal algorithms that can be trained to approximate some applied algorithms infinitely closely. These are the algorithms of artificial intelligence, i.e., algorithms dealing with thinking/learning/cognition!
- **Logic** explains what methods of reasoning over models exist so that the reasoning results (also models) with correct premises and proper reasoning rules somehow match the real world. Ontology has already explained how we sliced the world into objects, describing this slice with some models, so reasoning works with models, and "works" means computations follow, as we know from algorithmics. Role — **logician**. Basically, modern "mathematical logic" seems part of mathematics, but we use a more traditional understanding of logic, substantially intersecting with including semantic questions in logic and venturing into pragmatism, "taking seriously" — it is important to us that non-contradictory reasoning should underpin actions, and contradictory reasoning should invoke further intellectual engagement rather than action based on knowingly illogical arguments. Therefore, the main question we discuss here is "so what?", i.e., ignoring errors like "2\*2=5". If you know that there is an error in reasoning, such reasoning cannot be the basis for action! One cannot be illogical!
- **Rationality** as a fundamental method states that logical reasoning based on models/theories/explanations/knowledge is needed for actions that improve the world. Therefore, reasoning about cause-and-effect relationships in a specific situation is needed, which involves obtaining information about the world, deciding what to observe, observing it, and then deciding on an action, including whether to observe anything else or if the actor can make a decision to act to change the world in conditions of uncertainty ("a tiger is attacking you: gather more information and observe, run or attack, or come up with and implement other options?! You have about three seconds for all decision-making"). Decision theory will be the core of rationality. Role — **reason**.
- **Research/cognition** as a separate method. This method is actually part of the methods relying on "theory of cognition"/epistemology, rationality as "scientific thinking" — the second part of epistemology. Epistemology is not the theory of any method of cognition, but of those whose results are alienated (written culture of science! Presentation in words and formulas in formal languages!) and collectively verified. It differs from "theory of knowledge"/gnoseology, which includes artistic and religious irrational "knowledge" of the world in the form of non-alienated personal sensations. "Rational research"/"scientific cognition" explains how rational agents obtain useful theories/disciplines/explanations that they **take** **seriously**, i.e., begin to act on them hoping to "escape" unpleasant surprises the Universe is full of. We speculate about a good explanatory (causal) predictive/generative model/theory, then criticize this guess for non-contradictory outcomes of reasoning over this model and for better matching predictions of this model with experimental results. All necessary concepts for describing research are already known from conceptualization, concentration, mathematics, physics, semantics, ontology, algorithmics, logic, rationality. Research as a discipline/knowledge/theory/model explains how they are all utilized in the course of endless cognition. Role — **researcher/scientist**.
- **Aesthetics** provides criteria of beauty (in research, it is customary to speak about **elegance**) in the outcomes of thinking and applied labor. Aesthetics explains what impact the objects created by engineers/actors (including artists, performers, other "creative professionals," and now AI) have on their physical environment, as is usually the case with systems, but what changes they cause in the models of self of other agents, changes in their physical "selves," changes in world models and belief in the reliability of these models. It is not a fact that modern aesthetics only discusses, for example, the emotional impact of some products of labor and descriptions on human agents. No, modern aesthetics considers humans, AI agents, and artificial life. Role — **aesthetic**.
- **Ethics** tells us what we should strive for in life: what goals are acceptable for an agent and what means should be used to achieve them. Should people die, or would it be better to make them immortal? Is it normal if people change their worldview and flee to other societies, causing their original society to die? What is better: to kill and burn a group of people infected with a deadly virus and thus save humanity, or not to kill because "thou shalt not kill" is a commandment — and to hell with humanity, it will somehow survive? For ethical reasoning about this, we already understand what rationality is and how research is structured. Modern ethics is multi-layered, and for this, we can more or less fully utilize the concepts of the systemic approach from different thinking methods of the intelligence stack to discuss agents of different systemic levels conflicting in "saving" objects of these different systemic levels, possibly at the expense of "saving" objects of other levels. For some, to hell with a multimillion-dollar country, as long as all people are alive, and countries may disappear; for others, countries must survive "at any cost," even if only a couple of people remain in each of the millions of survivors. The role of seeking multi-level optimization for saving objects of different systemic levels in their inevitable conflict is the **conscience**. And henceforth, when the agent's "conscience speaks" — it is either "ethical tinkering" when the agent knows nothing about modern ethics as a fundamental thinking method (with its transdiscipline), or it is the thinking of a civilized and educated agent (a person or computer with AI) who knows something about modern multi-level ethics.
- **Rhetoric** explains how to persuade a person to perform certain actions or, conversely, to convince them not to act. You start with having a rational model of the situation (obtained through your research). Then you explain your model of the situation to another agent, trying to persuade them to use this model to achieve certain goals, while postponing their own goals. Rhetoric considers ethics to ensure sweet talk does not incite agents (animals, people, robots) to do something bad. Role — **rhetorician**. But you also use the theory of concepts: sweet speeches use metaphors and images to work with prototypes. Sweet persuasive speeches appeal to your fast thinking (S1 by Kahneman) for intuitive decision-making (with possible errors!) and attracting attention in communication. Passing rational models/knowledge requires abandonment of fast thinking in favor of slow thinking with strict object types and relationships, and the decisions will be rational, based on logical reasoning and decision theory, not based on metaphors and the intuition behind them. **Rhet** deals precisely with this: translating content between different ways of expressing knowledge and urging action based on the transmitted knowledge.
- **Methodology** discusses **methods/ways/practices** of work (labor/activity/culture/engineering) where agents (people, AI agents, enterprises) are organized into a team (in the case of enterprises — an "extended enterprise"), occupy roles within **the division of labor** by "working methods"/"types of labor"/practices/cultures, and then perform collective work on changing states of some objects, maintaining their roles, i.e., each agent professionalizes in some working method. The main thing is that changing states of objects does not just happen through work but through work by methods/ways of working. Methods continuously evolve, with the best chosen to date. Rhetoric helps understand how agents negotiate. The role dealing with methodology::method is **methodologist**. How to describe an applied method? Methodology precisely provides the answer to this question. You describe methods for creating rockets or growing oats — and this will be the basis for making organizational decisions on how to organize such an engineering project, altering and replacing methods used in organizational work. Methodology deals with working methods called by various terms from a long list of synonyms: "type of labor"/"working method"/ "way of working"/practice/activity/culture/style/"type of engineering" and even "strategy" turns out to be a working method an agent will adhere to in achieving their goals.
- **Engineering** (universal/transdisciplinary/fundamental, often called **systems engineering**) is the most general way/method of creating new and modifying old systems to improve the world. Only the most general engineering as a normative working method entered the fundamental thinking methods, used at all levels of organization of systems — from inanimate molecules and nanoparticles to humanity as a whole along with all its material culture, millions of tons of matter. In applied methods, engineering will then be specified for systems of different scales and different types at each scale. All previous levels of thinking methods in the intelligence stack are involved in reasoning about engineering, especially considering humans act as agents, humans and computers, sometimes humans with other living beings (e.g., blind people with guide dogs), and even computers alone (see modern robotics materials). The role implementing engineering methods is **engineer**.

Each thinking method in the intelligence stack, based on fundamental/scale-free discipline/transdiscipline/theory/knowledge, helps grasp the next method/culture/way/practice of thinking in the stack. Although this statement about the stack of thinking methods is rather conditional: all these fundamental thinking methods are closely intertwined in their explanations/theories/knowledge with one another, and their tools (modelers) are the same; it is not very clear what supports what.

**We have chosen such a** **composition** **of methods in the intelligence stack** **and the** **order of methods in it** **mainly for methodological purposes: to facilitate** **understanding** **during the training of strong thinking.** **Of course, in the evolution of knowledge, this set of thinking methods will change significantly, and many alternative variants of the intelligence stack will be proposed, competing with each other. However, our courses will rely on this set of fundamental thinking methods and this order of these methods in the intelligence stack.**