---
title: 'Minimum thinking requirement for modern humans: learn once, use in all projects'
---

Mastering thinking methods at the top of the intelligence stack usually requires a certain level of proficiency in the methods below. If you don't know what concept theory is, aren't familiar with logic, or ethics, then studying rhetoric will not be available to you. Let's recall the sequence of levels of today's intelligence stack (the set of methods can change! Development does not stand still! Moreover, there can be alternative versions of the intelligence stack even today, evolution implies the existence of many types, including many types of theories/explanations/disciplines):

-   Systems engineering
-   Methodology
-   Rhetoric
-   Ethics
-   Aesthetics
-   Research/knowledge
-   Rationality
-   Logic
-   Algorithms
-   Ontology
-   Concept theory
-   Physics
-   Mathematics
-   Semantics
-   Focus
-   Conceptualization

A barely crawling person will not be able to jump or dance; one must first build muscles (tools), and the brain must master muscle control techniques (discipline). Preparation for action, mastering the method, and gaining skill is required. Immediate action won't work. Only after preparing the body for action can one learn patterns of complex sports and dance movements.

Education, in particular, and training in general (**education** --- is a specialization of training aimed at enhancing fundamental/universal/general intelligence, i.e., teaching thinking methods of the intelligence stack) is arranged similarly: it provides for some sequence of learning (curriculum learning), knowledge accumulates piece by piece, not "in one big chunk at a time."

Arithmetic is studied before integrals, without knowing the multiplication table you cannot master higher mathematics --- arithmetic here is a prerequisite for higher mathematics. First, readiness and automation/fluency of thinking for more basic thinking skills, and then readiness and automation/fluency at more applied levels of thinking --- and so on at several levels.

First, one needs to be able to express thoughts in words somehow (conceptualization), then to maintain focus on thoughts (focus), then to distinguish the thoughts themselves, objects of the world, and words about them (semantics), then to understand physics and mathematics --- how they differ and why they are indispensable, then to understand types of objects and relationships (concept theory), maintain a multi-level object task while highlighting it with attention from the background (ontology), and so on.

Of course, there can be a huge number of educational routes (study programs/curriculums), during which intelligence is enhanced, i.e., some sequence of mastering thinking techniques from the intelligence stack methods is needed. Thus, to master systems thinking, you need to be familiar with not one, but all the thinking methods of the intelligence stack. For example,

-   In conceptualization, you learn that there are objects that we can name,
-   In focus, you learn to record the results of your reasoning,
-   In concept theory, you learn that the world must be modeled through typed objects and their relationships,
-   In physics, the type "system" will be given,
-   In ontology, a hierarchy concerning composition will give system levels,
-   In methodology, it is told that one system creates another system by some method/labor/practice/culture/activity/style,
-   In engineering, it will be clear by what means we create these systems.

We have once again repeated a small piece of how from the knowledge/theories/transdisciplinary methods of various thinking methods within the intelligence stack, the knowledge of systems thinking is formed.

Systems thinking is given "in types" of high-level abstraction, it is scale-invariant, universal in terms of applied subject areas, and not anthropocentric. Therefore, systems thinking is applicable to projects for creating and developing such diverse systems as rocket plane parts, airliners, pedigree sheep and hectares of forest, chefs and roboticists, diaper-producing companies and internet provider firms, Tolkien enthusiasts communities, and "invisible colleges" in science. Sometimes a society is created as an "individual country" or this society is modified without changing the country but becoming completely different ("revolution"), and sometimes super-intelligence is created as a hybrid of computer and human intelligence.

In various projects, different people work on different methods/practices with their different disciplines/theories/knowledge/algorithms, using different tools and different materials for these jobs. You need to think a bit about many of them to better understand your own project: each project itself includes many applied works on applied methods, and when problems arise, it also requires the work of intelligence methods, but there are never "spherical projects in a vacuum," a project meets countless methods of other projects’ work. Each outsider working in the project does their thing: external counterparties, material suppliers, buyers, managers, intermediaries, standardization organizations, new people appear in the project every day, and meaningful discussions with all of them are necessary. One must somehow understand what they all do to build substantial discussions with them. **Thinking and activity in all this diversity of activities** **of the project itself and the projects surrounding it** **are arranged similarly, and this compact thinking can be learned once and then applied in different works of one project, or even in different projects.** **Enhancing intelligence, including mastering systems thinking, is precisely dedicated to this compactification of thinking: you learn to think once and then apply in all projects. You turn on strong thinking once and then** **never** **turn it off.**

There is a legend that the talent for thinking (of whatever kind) is inherent. Yes, genetic predisposition to a certain type of thinking happens, just as athletes have a predisposition to certain sports. But it’s not so straightforward: hundreds of genes related to intelligence exist, genetic factors won't take you far in thinking.

Therefore, we recommend relying not on genetics but on training thinking: thinking techniques are not embedded in the brain; they need to be mastered and trained. This means that a trained "non-talent" will easily outdo an untrained "natural talent" in one type of thinking or another, who will remain "perennially promising," just not knowing how to think correctly. A potentially genius Mowgli, raised by wolves, won’t even know how to speak, let alone reach strong thinking. Inborn IQ doesn’t have significant importance (examples have been given), good education (that is, training in the methods of the intelligence stack) in life means much more!

Intelligence stack — a set of **the best** **to date in our** **civilization** thinking methods, based on the best explanatory theories. The best (state-of-the-art) in civilization as of this year, not some 2011 (new dawn of artificial intelligence using deep learning on neural networks began in 2012, in 2011 computers still couldn’t converse or see well!) or even the ancient 1980 (year of the first personal computer IBM PC).

These decisions about selecting particular thinking techniques from all known to humanity variations are aimed precisely at thinking abstractly, adequately, consciously, rationally, systematically, practically/proactively/actively, and not "savagely," ignoring all accumulated civilization thinking experience. And these decisions on selecting scale-invariant (universal for different sizes of systems and different time scales of existence) and non-anthropocentric (non-specific to humans) thinking techniques involve written designations of used thinking models, initial data, intermediate and final results of thinking, and also entry into the real world. Conditionally, computers here are also "in writing." And "entry into the real world" — modifying the physical world, taken to actions: from "approach to check out" to "go talk" and "change, so it does not interfere."

Decisions on choosing thinking methods/techniques are made not only by thinking techniques "inside the head," purely informational/computational work without the body. This is quite a proactive and active method of thinking work going into the world (into other people’s heads, other data centers) and then improving both the world and the deciding thinking agent.

Does a civilization-cultured intelligence, which conducts thinking using the fundamental methods of the intelligence stack in their modern versions, restrain or, on the contrary, stimulate creativity compared to live "savage" thinking? The civilization experience shows that educated and mentally trained people usually win over the ignorant despite their allegedly "template thinking." Genius self-taught savages are extremely rare. At the same time, upon inspection, "self-taught savages" often turn out to be more than well-read and educated, albeit their education wasn’t linked to an official institution and the patterns of their "genius self-thinking" they also took from literature and well-educated teachers, not invented on the go. It is a popular legend that self-taught individuals never studied anywhere. They very much did study, just on their own and not "officially."

Self-educating one's intelligence needs to be "pumped up" and "developed" just like muscles and joints to prepare the body for movement — after all, the brain is also trainable, it’s plastic, physically changing during training! And this is why thinking training isn’t quick. Just like with regular muscles, you won't get quick results in one or two thinking workouts, it takes months and years, for slow biological processes in the brain are involved.

During human thinking using fundamental knowledge, neuron synapses grow, and brain blood circulation improves. Intelligence as a physically realized on the brain calculator/“thinking machine” for thinking methods develops slowly, this is months and years. A good comparison here is sports: in three months of training you won't become a champion, but in three years --- not yet a champion, but you’ll differ dramatically from "people off the street."

But there is a trick: a person doesn’t rely solely on the biological nature of their thinking, but also employs a computer. Even if it’s not a full-fledged computer but just paper and pen, it becomes easier for the biological brain to manage attention, utilize a larger memory, and exchange thinking results. And also, human intelligence uses the body, and it’s not just about the fingers moving when writing or eye muscles working when reading. In the "Rational Work" course, which provides basics of conceptualization, quite a lot is said about the connection between mind and body focus (for example, ontological jitter can be recognized by body sensations).

Thinking is proactive, it goes out into the physical world, the body is also significant here, including the body's extension in the form of tools — telescopes, microscopes, cars, rockets, humanoid robots.

Human thinking has an external nature; it occurs not only in the brain but in the entire body, and goes beyond its limits (the 4E thesis^[Overview of approaches to thinking as going beyond the body boundaries, including criticism of such approaches, see at <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7250653/>]), so systems thinking is trained not only as a mental exercise but also involving computer modeling tools — from merely writing in a text editor or complex spreadsheets editor (like notion.so or coda.io) to sophisticated mathematical multiscale modeling of simulations (multiscale, at different levels of structure/organization of the simulated system as a physical object, with different types of models for different scales).

We emphasize that one cannot speak only of fundamental disciplines, that is, pure theory/knowledge/explanations. You need to talk about methods/ways of working, where discipline/knowledge/algorithms are supported by tools that enhance the skill of the "naked thinking brain" (or "naked thinking computer," referring to AI). People (and now also computer neural networks and robots) have long not worked "just with hands," they use tools. In thinking, people haven't long thought "just with brains," they use computers (and computers use other computers to assist themselves, or even people, or even long-dead people — for example, they read the results of thinking in the books of long-dead authors).

**If you find yourself deeply pondering without** **making any notes, without creating any** **computer** **models —** **you’re clearly doing something wrong. Thinking today involves writing and modeling, relying solely on the human biological memory of a single person is not an option. Systems thinking is no exception here.**

Prolonged fundamental education is needed not just to think civilly, but to think fluently, using thinking tools (conversational partners like AI and other smart people, notes in modelers, notes in natural languages). It’s like in sports: in three months you won't become a champion in any sport, but in three years you will dramatically differ from "people off the street." And in ten years you can already think about championship: most of your potential competitors simply won't get to the point of comparing your and their skill if you train/study all ten years. And recreational training for kids in sports schools is very different from rigorous training of the Olympic reserve. In education, it’s the same: if you have fun-learning for three months — your intelligence is unlikely to be strong. If you work hard for many years, you will dramatically differ from all "people off the street," and if it’s about ten years — you can talk about interacting with the smartest people on the planet, and not only will it be interesting for you with them, but it will also be interesting for them with you!

Trained to fluency, thought patterns enable you to quickly conduct typical abstract, rational, adequate, conscious, systematic, practical reasoning as if along laid-down tracks in the brain, without expending thinking efforts, i.e., intuitively, "on autopilot" --- including reasoning "step by step" thinking by textbook patterns, which, after training, do not seem extremely hard.

**Only if these** **"thinking tracks"** **suddenly turn out to be somewhere not laid,** **only** **when encountering something truly new, can you switch to effortful** **“just thinking, doing our best,”** **engage other, exploratory** **thinking mechanisms,** **"naked biological intelligence,"** **sometimes somehow using trial and error external tools like computer modeling.** **But such** **departures** **into unfamiliar thinking —** **are an exception, not a rule. You are very lucky if you** **find yourself** **on such** **a frontier, rejoice that you are among the vanguard of human civilization.**

But not necessarily you will be able to come up with something on this frontier, to add to the stock of effective thinking patterns of humanity: evolution with trial and error is very effective, but most trials are failures, and you may simply not have enough time and resources for successful trials.

These culture-derived accelerating thought patterns are used both in the most basic types of thinking (general logical reasoning) and in more complex ones based on them (general engineering thinking), and in rapidly changing even more specialized and complex types of reasoning, including a mixture of knowledge/thinking and some routine applied reasoning on already well-known material.

Thought patterns are used in the work of an aerospace engineer, manager, investor, dolphin trainer, dancer, primary school teacher, politician (they can be people, but they can also be robots, and even organizations of people and robots). Thinking should be cultural/practical/stylish/active — it should follow the method/way. This means that intelligence should somehow repeat the same thinking techniques if these are the best-known techniques. Weak thinking techniques you invent each time "for the problem" — no guarantee they will cope. To be smart, one needs to know how to be smart. Strong thinking patterns need to be learned. This is done in the form of studying thinking techniques from the methods of the intelligence stack.

Fluent thinking should be achieved in any thinking, thinking needs to be trained, like any other behavior, like any other method/practice/culture/style/activity/strategy.

Besides the fact that learned and then trained to fluency cultural/stylish/practical/“by some method” thinking patterns provide a speed advantage over savage thinking, they prevent gross thinking mistakes. Once you learn multiplication — you use it all your life. Once you learn that a system needs to be considered functionally at the moment of its work within the super-system and also considered constructively at the moment of its creation and development — and you use it all your life.

**"Payment is for the coordination and satisfaction of external project roles' interests, not for the** ** “system concept implementation" and especially not for** **the "requirements implementation," which already no longer exist in modern engineering, the** **very idea of "requirements" is outdated"** --- **this material is presented in the systems thinking course, once for all systems.** If you have not learned and applied it in life, you can be left without money! It’s better to learn this once to avoid making mistakes all your life! Knowledge of systems thinking techniques is very practical, saves time, and prevents mistakes.

An "educated person" should master the same compact thinking on the methods of the intelligence stack, and it will be useful for him in various activities and projects. After all, a person will have to play many different labor/project/professional roles in life, dealing with methods of various engineering of different systems — growing flowers, children, manufacturing gears, programming AI assistants, arranging a hotel room, setting up a tent in the mountains, catching snakes, designing femtosecond lasers, negotiating with AI about material output format, etc. Here there will be both working methods and methods/ways/culture of behavior as a family member, parent, voter, politician.

A person (though not only a person, but also an enterprise, and even a computer system with AI, or even without AI) in life plays many roles, behind each of which are some sometimes large ("aerospace engineering") and sometimes very fragmented and small ("bearing production") applied methods for creating systems of a certain level of organization needed for them. Each of these applied methods involves its specific applied reasoning patterns, but when faced with new and unexpected turns in the project to solve problems, you will need to connect general/fundamental methods of thinking of the intelligence stack.

Whether you are a founder of a company in the sex toy market, a project manager for space tourism, or an engineer of quantum computers — you will need for the implementation of many applied methods for these employments to be focused, use logic, coordinate complex system models with your colleagues, maintain attention on many of your and others' systems that your project affects and are affected by your project, you will use computers with universal (AI) and not very universal (ordinary corporate software) algorithms. In the next project, everything will repeat on entirely different project content: your entire intelligence will be required again, no matter what you do: no project, where everything is known and only by rules, exists. And if there is some entirely familiar action, it won’t even be called a "project"!

Thinking as an activity of intelligence to solve problems, to understand a complex and continuously changing world --- is universal; it will always be with you, and **systems thinking is part of this minimum thinking requirement of civilized individuals** and civilized AI. Though one can say that systems thinking is part of the minimum thinking requirement of a civilized organization: systems thinking is collective; it unites intellects in an organization, enhancing the intellect of the entire organization.

It is essential to take into account that we are talking about the best to date (state-of-the-art) thinking techniques. Basic thinking techniques are relatively stable (their change time can be measured in hundreds of years: how many centuries did Aristotelian logic last before it ceased being used?), but in the 21st century, even basic techniques can change during a long human life, so you need