---
title: Speak not with people, speak with roles
---

You must determine the actor/“role-performer agent”'s method of work by their actions and statements and assign the role based on this method. This is done regardless of what this performer is called in real life---their job title, how they name themselves, how they are referred to in project documents, how people around them call them, and whether they are a person, organization, or a robot of some organization. A rose smells sweet, whether you call it a rose or not. If a person is fixing a toilet, that is the role of a plumber, even if the person fixing the toilet calls themselves a cardiothoracic surgeon. Focus on what the agents do, not what they are named---names can be chosen for various reasons.

Next, you need to understand the current object of interest of the role and determine the role's preferences for this object of interest. After this, you will understand who the role's allies and opponents are (also roles), and you will determine yourself (as you also have a role with its own objects of interest and preferences, and you need to carry out a role's method of work efficiently!)---you are an ally or an opponent.

Then, you need to find a suitable method of description/viewpoint for discussing the the object of interest. **Method of description** **(viewpoint)** — it is akin to a map legend, showing which objects and their relationships will be depicted on the description map. How to make and document descriptions of different degrees of formality you already learned in the “Rational Work” course.

Later, in your statements, documents, actions, provide descriptions (the map itself according to the chosen legend), clearly sticking to the object of interest of your interlocutor::role, and show what will happen in the project with the implementation of his preferences concerning the value of an important characteristic for his role, and also negotiate with other agents, as the interests of other roles also need to be considered.

If you hear something about finances::“object of interest,” then you need to understand that before you is a financier::role, and abstract from the appearance of the actor realizing::the financier’s relation, i.e., ignore for the current reasoning the height, age, gender, religion, intonations, and degree of hostility, though you need to understand the actor’s skill in financial discussions. You need to understand further which important characteristic currently interests the financier, and then choose an adequately reflecting method of descriptions: balance sheet, profit and loss statement, cash flow---these are three different description methods for answering different objects of interest within the general interests of “finances.” **Don’t make a mistake when choosing the method of description: if the financier’s question is about a cash gap, it’s useless to talk about the balance!** **Therefore, you need to have a certain methodological/labor/engineering outlook on** **the methods of work** **of many roles required for project success. At least---** **take a course in systems engineering, personality engineering, systems management, though this is far from enough, but better than not having any outlook** **on engineering methods**.

This is all valid not only when interacting with a human-actor but also with robots, and organizations (when you ask questions via chat, and you receive answers, or vice versa---you are asked questions and you send answers, it doesn’t matter who is on the other end of the chat: how many people are talking, and whether they are people or a robot).

Always speak not with the agent (person, company, their computer, their questionnaire), but with the role, though you should monitor the agent’s emotional state (if it’s a person) and the resource situation. For example, if you are riding an elevator, it’s pointless to start a two-hour conversation; it’s futile, and it’s also pointless to discuss with Vasya Pupkin his relationship to Desdemona in the role of Othello when Vasya is fully immersed in playing Prince Hamlet: his response might unexpectedly be “I’ll ask Desdemona, to be or not to be”---don't be surprised, you misunderstood the roles and confused Vasya with your question.

For example, when you perform modeling within our course framework, remember: such modeling is offered to you by a “teacher,” whose task is to teach you something from the course, to train you in some skill from the course. There is no task to check your knowledge “in general,” or to exercise something that doesn’t belong to the course--- and therefore possible answers need to be given precisely along this line of reasoning, addressing the “teacher’s role,” and not the agent playing the teacher's role as a citizen of your country, the course's organization as a legal entity in some jurisdiction, the computer program as something soulless and purposeless, etc.---the number of senselessly possible role choices could be huge, and here the outlook comes in handy! **“What is the teacher** **trying to train you with the questions or proposed modeling?”** --- answer this hypothesis related to the role!

It’s important not so much to give an answer to the concrete singular question posed by an actor in an unclear role, but generally to respond to the interest of his current project role, giving a comprehensive description of the object of interest using the chosen (and preferably agreed upon and explained) method of description so that the actor understands the chances of realizing the preferences of his role. Respond not to the spoken question itself, but directly to the interest! You are asked: “did you use gold in your system?” but after understanding “where the question is coming from” (what the role interest is), the correct answer is not “used/ did not use,” and not even “there are one and a half grams of gold per three tons of the system,” but “the price per system unit will not exceed $300 for orders of 1000 units.” And this will reduce the conversation time several times over!

If the interests/preferences of various roles even of a single actor differ concerning one interest, and even more so the preferences of different roles performed by a team of actors, this is a reason for negotiations regarding selling out 1. First describes the method of description, which is one negotiation topic, and 2. The values of an important characteristic that needs to be agreed upon. This is a reason for inventive activity in the course of these negotiations (methods of conflict studies^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict_resolution>], invention theory^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ TRIZ>] can significantly help here).

This is a typical way to use methodological (in this case) thinking: important objects and their connections from the meta-meta-model form a checklist of what you must definitely think about and what you must do during the conversation:

- Shift your focus from the actor to their work method, determine the method by deeds and words.
- Rebrand the agent according to the role of their work method.
- Understand the object of the role interest of the interlocutor::role.
- Understand the interlocutor's::role preference in the object of interest (for example, some architectural characteristic).
- Split negotiations on the method of description reflecting the object of interest and the value of an important characteristic (one complex negotiation on two topics simultaneously is much worse than two simpler negotiations on different topics).
- Take into account in these negotiations the existence of other roles with similar objects of interest, including actors performing these roles in the negotiations. **You can’t “agree with everyone”! Any later agreement among these “everyone” among themselves will disrupt their agreements with you. The only way out---** **is to agree everyone around you!** The object of interest may be the same for these “everyone,” but the preferences---differ! And during the project, priorities in interests might change: at some point “price decides everything,” but then a month later it might turn out that “we don't care about the price, but the system weight decides everything!”---be prepared for such situations.

This checklist---is simply a representation in another form of the material from the previous paragraphs. The method/way of its application is developed during each conversation, participation in each meeting, work in every collective project. This is typical use of materials on fundamental methods of thinking in the intellect stack (conceptionalization, semantics, ontology, ethics, rhetoric, methodology, systems engineering among some): objects of disciplines/theories of these fundamental methods of thinking allow you to routinely think about what is important in the current situation, ignore the unimportant and thus significantly save effort and time. Thus, during negotiations, besides this role reasoning, you will also use rhetorical culture (persuasive speech), in which you will focus on appealing to the neural network of your interlocutor, not a dry computer (i.e., you will manage the formality level of statements, consciously use different concept theories in your statements), will take into account the agent’s emotional state, and assess his current knowledge level (perhaps something will need additional explanation, especially if the actor-interlocutor is poorly qualified in performing his project role). And take into account whether you are talking to people at all, whether you are personally familiar, or are communicating “with an indefinite circle of people” or even with a computer “undead.”

Why synchronize interests? Remember: systems thinking says that the system being created and its design will only succeed with synchronized values of important characteristics, with synchronized interests/preferences regarding the system. Synchronizing interests significantly reduces the time needed, reduces the complexity of this work:

- Conversations not with people::actors, but with their roles regarding the objects of their interests and methods of descriptions of these objects of interest, the interests themselves as preferences in the values of important characteristics of the system,
- Predicting intentions of actors and their possible strategies and plans for realizing intentions in their explicitly and implicitly manifested roles,
- Splitting complex communication into separate questions (the principle of “separation of concerns” will be discussed a bit later),
- Using systems thinking to find the necessary objects of interest for the discussion (this will also be covered a bit later in our course),
- Engaging the full intellect stack (for example, rhetoric as the method of persuasive speech).

**After transitioning to this kind of** **“role conversations”** **(instead of conversations with** **actors)** **those people::actors, who earlier would not speak with you, will now engage with you.** They previously did not understand your usefulness in clarifying the situation with areas of their interest, realizing their preferences in important characteristics of the systems involved in the project (including numerous creation systems' characteristics), so it was **uninteresting** to them to communicate with you. It all boils down to recognizing that **people-performers of roles** **act not according to their whims** **as** **“people”** **or AI-agents,** **but act in accordance with role-imposed preferences** **in** **role-dictated** **important characteristics. People-actors are** **not interested in everything, but their** **preferences in** **their** **role objects** **of interest** **they will not abandon,** **they will not “forget” their role interests---** **these role interests/preferences** **are culturally conditioned, and in understanding them, it is critical to focus not on the agent’s** **personal traits, especially if this is a living person** **but on** **the culturally created labor culture** **of the role being played by the actor.**