---
title: Leadership
---

To ensure that people::agents sustainably hold the required roles in an organization, there is a method called **leadership**. It helps executors to reliably occupy roles in a project (including, if necessary, encouraging them to reach the required level of mastery in their roles), as well as assisting them in cooperation in these roles. Leadership methods primarily persuade or "talk" agents into taking positions; assistance in learning to achieve mastery is rarely included in leadership, as it is often assumed that "the agent can, but does not want to, and needs motivation." If an agent "wants, but cannot" --- this is a different situation, an educational one (but for an agent to start learning a craft, leadership is also required, as the agent usually "can learn, but does not want to, and needs motivation").

In management as organizational engineering, leadership is equivalent to production methods, i.e., methods of creating/implementing the target system based on a known project. In production, we buy or fabricate structural parts and then assemble them to ensure they perform the desired functions when operational. Leadership is not that straightforward, starting with the fact that there often is no "known organizational project," and it needs to be made explicit. Then, people need to be sourced, usually by the administration, which often may hire people lacking the necessary skills because hiring individuals with the required skills is “too expensive.” Thus, training or educating people is necessary (enhancing intelligence because there not only is often a shortage of skilled people but also a shortage of educated people, and everyone agrees with this. For instance, enhancing intelligence through training at the School of System Management, which might take about a year, three initial semesters, or a couple of years---six semesters of the "Organizational Development" program).

Then it's necessary to "persuade" people to take positions, teach them to perform their roles, and remain focused. Perscading involves taking not a job position, not a position in the staffing schedule, not a vacancy, but a role position!

Leadership does not deal with people taking on the authority to manage their and others' labor and company property/equipment/capital and then using this authority. Leadership specifically addresses the problem of agents who are reluctant to play their roles, even if they have the required skills. It is often said, "yes, I am good at organizing events, but I really want to learn to work with 3D models in CAD,” turning a good event manager into a poor project engineer.

Leadership is often called "catalysis of cooperation" because the division of labor is primarily the distribution of roles among different performers (not all roles are given to one performer), and if some role is missed in its execution, then the project/play/organization of labor halts, and cooperation fails. There must be performers for all necessary roles in the project who perform these roles well without shirking. For instance, if no one plays the role of Ophelia and four extremely busy actors play Prince Hamlet in one ensemble, there is no cooperation regarding Ophelia's role. It needs to be specially organized--- either hiring additional people for Ophelia's role (either already capable of playing it or who will need to be hired and then taught), or retraining one of the Prince Hamlet performers to play the new role of Ophelia, but the organization will then lack the necessary number of Prince Hamlets during this time. Since all current role performers are busy with their role work without any spare time for learning new methods of their work, it's rare to retrain old role performers. Someone must do the work of the old roles' performers while new people are being trained for new roles, so the old role performers will continue to work full-time in new roles without time for retraining. New people will learn to do the new work using new methods in new roles.

When people sustainably occupy some culturally-driven position, professionalize in its working methods, and pursue the interests of this position, their life gains meaning as they participate in the culture, a team, and evidently contribute within the division of labor.

People who securely retain their position can very effectively play their role in collective/project-based labor division, that is, distributing performed tasks through various methods to different people-agents who have a high level of mastery in executing those methods.

Leader--- this is also a role! The role of a leader is played not only by managers but occasionally by all employees. **A leader** **doesn’t so much "lead by example" or "show the way" (strategist), as much as they help people occupy and retain** **role** **positions** **within the organization. They are the director, assigning people-actors (executors) to** **project/organizational/activity/professional** **roles and helping them to successfully master these roles and maintain them amid the corporate life's hustle.**

Leadership::method is a bridge connecting the impersonal world of organizational development and design (knowledge, schemes, role/functional objects) with the vibrant world of role-executing people, with their personal (not professional-role) preferences.

Informally speaking, a leader persuades (in the course of personality engineering, it will be "teaches") certain executors to play a certain role in a project, to take a role/professional position. The leader does not define it themselves! They learn it from the organizational project! And if there is no organizational project, or it exists but is not documented, expect problems.

For example, in a play (led by a script, which will be the organizational project), the role of Ophelia (role!) is lacking, and of the available actors in the troupe, only Peter Nikolaevich is left. Peter Nikolaevich is not keen on playing Ophelia. The leader might have several conversations with Peter Nikolaevich: talk about the art of acting being about transformation, the need for acquiring new skillsets (continuous education, infinite development), about the challenge of transforming a man into a woman and therefore testing acting skill, about the ancient traditions of Kabuki theatre^[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabuki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabuki)], where hereditary male actors play both male and female roles. And eventually, one evening Peter Nikolaevich goes out in a skirt to try it, realizes it’s exceedingly difficult from an acting perspective, "a true test of his skill" as the leader said, and after a month is successfully playing Ophelia to great acclaim. The troupe is happy, Peter Nikolaevich is happy, and the audience is pleased. This is leadership: on one hand, catalyzing cooperation and enriching people's lives (the "official" modern understanding of leadership), and on the other hand--- persuading people to play necessary roles for the organization (defined by the organizational project) well (the informal modern understanding of leadership).

Typically, the entire team engages in leadership as a method of "persuading agents to properly execute a role," with each role performer in the project being guided towards sustainable occupation of their position by practically all members of the united team. Hence, everyone in the team plays their professional/project role and the role of a leader. Leadership is implicitly distributed, not personal.

Tight-knit teams are characterized precisely by this "distributed leadership," as no single executor-leader-administrator can conduct all necessary leadership work in a large team--- they simply lack the time for heartfelt conversations with hundreds or even thousands of colleagues (co-workers, working together) if only one person-executor is engaged in this leadership. In a nutshell, there is leadership in a good project team, but explicit leaders are usually absent--- everyone engages a bit in leadership towards others and (importantly!) with **conscious leadership towards themselves, demonstrating role mastery.** If in the game/theater metaphor, leadership is a method by which the game master/director works, then role mastery is what players/actors are taught. And, of course, all players/actors are taught to be a bit of game masters/directors (and in life managers).

Leadership is discussed in the course "Personality Engineering" and in more detail in the course "System Management."