---
title: External and Internal Roles
---

Conditionally, functional/project/stakeholder roles can be divided into **external** and **internal** in relation to the team of engineers directly creating the system (with creator teams across the creation graph, it is more complex and each time requires figuring out which project is meant).

Internal roles — these are roles of the **project** **team** (classic engineers or not-so-classic ones — doctors, teachers, various specialties of managers, marketers, etc.), while external ones — these are all others who are not part of the project team, but who are affected by or affect the project. A typical external role is "user," who **should be named by** **their** **role in** **their** **domain** — player, patient, diner, or payer, contractor, inspector, etc.

A good analysis of types of external roles in large sales (e.g., engineering equipment — unlike retail sale of a toy car) is given in Neil Rackham's "Strategy of Working with Customers in Large Sales"^[<http://www.koob.ru/rekhem_nick/strategiya_raboti_s_klientami_v_bolshih_prodazhah>]. In this rather old (1989) book, it is stated that in a large organization, the simple word "client" can hide very different roles — and each of them needs to be engaged differently. Hence, it is better not to say "our clients are polyclinics" anymore for over thirty years; it's not best practice. In real life, within this polyclinic, one discovers many different roles — doctor, nurse, manager, IT specialist (and several different ones!), lab technician, patient, and usually invisible investor-owner. When you said, "our clients are polyclinics," whom did you mean? For each, you need to answer different questions, present material at different levels of detail, praise the system for various features, differentiate from competitors differently, negotiate differently at different sales stages. Therefore, **try to name** **external** **roles not based on their relation to the team (here, the decidedly overly general word "client" will escape, as "all those who are outside"), but as they are called in their** **activities, in their teams.**

We recommend taboos on certain words that are very popular in such cases and hide entire bouquets of roles with very different role preferences in various essential system characteristics:

- **User** — name them as they are called in the project roles of their projects. If it's about a game, it’s a "player." If it's corporate software, there are usually many different people playing very different roles — and for these different roles, one will have to consider very different important characteristics; they cannot be combined under the word "user." The key guide here — the role is named by the key work method of the role performer. If they play a computer game — player, if they practice medicine — doctor, if they think about finances — financier. A simple test: is there a subject area, specialization method in the name? Not just "user," because for the "user," the subject area is unclear, the method for the "user" is not applied from any subject area, but just "method in general," this is too abstract for productive discussions! Ground it! Words should sound from some subject area, not general methodological words!
- **Buyer** — usually there is also separately a beneficiary (one who receives benefits from the purchase), acquirer (legal party to the contract), payer, trustee (e.g., courier receiving the purchase), expert (one who selects the product), etc., and all need to be considered in different roles, considering their different role interests in various important characteristics.
- ... you got the idea. The word "customer" or "client" is also suspicious — often there are people with opposite preferences. The finance customer wants the lowest price and therefore minimal features, the engineering customer wants the maximum features and therefore the highest price — and they have opposite preferences in price and features; if they are combined as the "customer," not much can be done with this in the project, all must be considered separately.

Often external people-in-roles/stakeholders are unavailable. For example, you have 10 thousand players of your phone game, all having one role "player." But until the game program is written, and no one is playing, there are no players. Remember: if some "Vasya Pupkin"::orgunit/"constructive object" is not playing a hobbit::role/"functional object," then there is no "hobbit" in the physical world at that moment! In such cases, when there are "no players of the role, no one to ask, they will be there someday," external roles are trusted to team members to represent.

A quarter of a century ago, the **persona method** described in Alan Cooper's book "The Inmates Are Running the Asylum"^[<http://www.koob.ru/cooper_a/psih_v_rukah_pacientov>] in 1999 was used for this. There, not the roles, but the role performers — characters/personas — were modeled. This method suggested creating a typical portrait of the *user* of the product, and someone from the team should play his or her role as in a theater. For example, "single mother, 32 years old, living on the outskirts of a small town, using her tablet for household finances." But in recent years, there has been a wave of criticism of the persona method since its focus was not on role modeling and work methods of the role to identify role interests but on modeling non-essential characteristics of the role performer agent, poorly connected with the essence of the matter, i.e., with the sources of the role's interest. This is a typical mistake: working with the agent instead of identifying the work method of the agent, his role, and role interests.

It's like if we advised describing Prince Hamlet in the persona method, suggesting a precise description of his weight, height, dietary habits, clothing preferences (thus describing not the role but the agent who could play Prince Hamlet) and hoping this would give a more accurate answer about his activity preferences at moments when he asks his role question "to be or not to be." Understandably, this is psychologically comfortable for the team. It is extremely important for the project team to design the system not as convenient "for themselves," as this would be a conflict of interest — they would prefer the system easier to develop, but as convenient "for others." And designing a system for the "fat Hamlet" is much better than for "me, though I'm not Hamlet at all but ready to portray him as I understand." However, from the perspective of role interest modeling of the persona — it is a dead end, though for the system's success, it is necessary to satisfy role interests!

It's better to abstract from the "single mother living on the outskirts of a small town" and instead of "user" call her a "home financier" — this will exclude all areas of the single mother's interest, all areas of the small town resident's interest from discussions, and that is correct, they will only be extra, distracting from the important. If any characteristics of the performer/actor need to be considered, they are considered as features of a different role of this actor, not the agent-actor itself. Thus, for visually impaired (important characteristic: accessibility of the interface) a large font must be provided in the interface (preference). But we understand that the roles of "home financier" and "visually impaired" have different important characteristics, and these characteristics will be reflected in the system's functionality and design differently.

A conflict of interests may even be revealed (different preferences regarding one subject of interest/important characteristic in one role performer). A home financier wants to see a lot on a small screen at once, and a visually impaired person wants a large font, and let everything not fit on the screen, it will be inconvenient to scroll, but everything is visible! Which font size will it be — like for the visually impaired, or for the home financier? Who will win in this conflict of interests? Now, different solutions can be proposed. For instance, a screen magnifier for the font (a lot on the screen, but the magnifier allows viewing something in a normal size for the eyes), adjustable font size (each role performer, either the home financier or the visually impaired, will adjust the font size to their liking), etc.

All modern methods of modeling external roles in the project (for example, Jobs To Be Done method^[[https://medium.com/no-flame-no-game/what-is-jobs-to-be-done-and-job-stories-4c57c1dc84cf](https://medium.com/no-flame-no-game/что-такое-jobs-to-be-done-и-job-stories-4c57c1dc84cf)]) try to simultaneously increase the accuracy of substantial role modeling and the role's work method to better determine role objects of interest and preferences (success is needed, so satisfying these preferences is crucial!), and raise the psychological credibility of this representation for the project team, because "helping a person" is psychologically easier than "satisfying what a model describes." For this, various subject matter experts are invited to personal meetings in the team, focus groups for potential performers of the necessary external role are organized, team members themselves try to gain the necessary experience and play the external role.

Methods of modeling and "personal representation by live people" of different external roles in the project are discussed during the development of the **concept** **of system use** (description of system functionality that brings benefits during its operation). The development of the system use concept is conducted according to the development methods involved by the developers::role. In addition to the concept of use, the developers::role also develop the **system concept**, perform designing with sufficient detail for manufacturing, create the system (using an internal production platform, "factory," "conveyor" constructed by the platform engineers). Developers/developers::role do a lot more, and they are usually considered the main ones concerned with satisfying the interests of external project roles, especially user roles (we have discussed that these roles can be numerous, and they will be called not "user" but something more specific for their subject area).

Nevertheless, satisfying the interests of external roles will concern not only developers but all team roles involved in the project. For instance, architects::role also model external project roles because they are concerned with satisfying their interests regarding specific **architectural characteristics** that developers might overlook. For example, developers of a server system might be concerned with some product capabilities requiring too much computational power for one "player," the architect's task is to remember there will be many such players. Thus, the architect models what people from the promotion service tell (expecting these "players" to be a hundred, a hundred thousand, or a hundred million simultaneously). Consequently, the architect and developers will be in a productive conflict, and developers are likely to develop a technical (architectural) debt, i.e., works needed to satisfy players' interests not only in functionality but also in players' interests ("gaming audience") in server availability and performance (these "availability" and "performance" being architectural characteristics), and the representative of the "gaming audience" (all players combined, as opposed to a single player) will be the promotion service. The developer team may consider the architect an external project role; the team manager considers developers and the architect (or an entire architect team) as team members.

An illustrative example is one of the engineering teams suddenly asking to include a local lawyer in the team. The motive: during negotiations, the agent playing the lawyer's role acted as if working against the engineering team, not as a team member! The team's calculation: after the formal inclusion as a team member, the legal role performer will primarily consider the engineers' interests, not some "oversights" or whomever he accounts for, representing and promoting the interests not of engineers regarding these "oversights," but the interests of "oversights," ignoring the engineers' interests.

"\-- How much is two plus two?--- Are we buying or selling?" Always remember this. In the web of organizational relationships, it is easy to get lost without **understanding (i.e., emphasis on** **modeling,** **with documented models)** of work methods, roles, objects of interest, and interests, who::agent represents whose::roles interests.

Not so much "externalness" or "internality" is important, but rather **accounting** **(emphasis on documenting the modeling results)** of all found objects of interest and then performing work on agreeing and satisfying interests based on this list of objects of interest as a checklist — and remembering that interests come from culturally conditioned roles, not specific agents performing interest-bearer roles, many interests will not be publicly presented but may appear in private negotiations (and that is good, since if everyone talks to everyone, it is a bad architecture, bad project modularity, more details in the course "Systems Engineering" and "Systems Management").

In any case, missing external and internal roles always need to be somehow played out in the project, organizing for this some competent, at least somewhat qualified, not randomly available role performers, otherwise, the system's success will be in question. Remember that the success of a system is determined by the agreement of roles (Prince Hamlet understands something about the Danish kingdom), not by the agreement of role performers (Vasya Pupkin, assigned to play Prince Hamlet, knows nothing about the Danish kingdom)!

If a deaf person performs the role of a music connoisseur, he will play the role poorly — and his agreement with some music will mean nothing, it won't guarantee the success of the music. If an operational management pro performs the role of an engineer-architect, his agreement with the system's design will mean a lot administratively, but nothing in systems engineering, as agreement is needed from a qualified actor-performer in systems engineering role. The agreement of an experienced operational management role performer, posing as an engineer, doesn’t count.

The failure/misfortune of many projects is explained by decisions made by inexperienced performers of professional roles (while being authorized to make decisions for any role, but this explains but doesn't justify).

If it is difficult for someone to imagine an abstract "Prince Hamlet" (but that's exactly what you need to do!), then at least imagine a persona: create a typical role performer. In any case, avoid thinking that all people-in-roles are like you-in-role. All people-in-roles are unique, and experienced role performers have considerable experience in playing the corresponding role, plus they often have more time to perform their role in your project than you do — unless you are a professional in this role. But if you are a developer, your chance to properly perform someone else's external role is close to zero ("the best model of a cat is another cat, preferably the same," you have to take someone with similar skill, not a broad understanding of skill). Special efforts must be made to represent external roles in the project: conducting focus groups, talking to positioners, studying literature, etc.

The same can be said about you: you in your traditional roles, in which you have skill, will have more time to perform them, and have more experience in playing them than performers of other roles. If this is not the case, and in your project "the cobbler bakes pies, the pie-maker stitches boots," then your project is in danger, and this danger comes from you.

A boss is not a role, it is the authority to make decisions. A decision will be made, but it will be bad if the boss does not have mastery in the role's work method. Verify the skill of bosses in performing some activity, in occupying if not a position, then at least fleetingly occupying a role and demonstrating skill. Ask them simple test questions (e.g., "by what method did you obtain this result? Which textbook can I refer to repeat the reasoning that led you to this decision?"). Of course, you'll need to decide: do you love the project or the boss more. If the boss more, then to hell with the project, failed due to the role incompetence/lack of qualification of the agent-boss (the agent occupying the boss's organizational position).