---
title: 'Supervisors: they are jokers, expect them to play any roles'
---

People often confuse activity/project/organizational roles and organizational units/filled organizational positions when looking at supervisors—because supervisors' ability to manage resources is very important. Will you align some preferences on the subjects of your interest with the player in the professional role (substantive discussion) or with the supervisor (will permit or not, based on unclear considerations)?

**Supervisors in relation to roles** **should be viewed as card** **«jokers»**^[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joker_(playing_card)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joker_(playing_card))**, which can become any card at the player's will.** A supervisor tries to personally play those roles which he/she considers underrepresented in the project or attempts to understand the situation to delegate the resolution of some issues to those organizational units (individual people or teams) within the project that have a sufficient level of expertise to accomplish the work via the method necessary to solve a challenging issue. To do this, he/she actively seeks out overlooked interests/preferences and also engages in leadership, meaning he/she places an individual or group in the necessary role as the smallest organizational unit or even appoints an organizational unit of several people as co-organized actors with their internal distribution of roles within the team-unit. This leadership by the supervisor aims to ensure the quality execution of a specific work method that accounts for certain interests. One must pay special attention to supervisors’ speech: their areas of interest are usually undefined, not presented, and they regularly change them during the conversation.

Remember: "words-terms are important and unimportant," hence there is no need to focus on job titles and official titles. You should carefully listen to what the supervisor is saying right now and/or read his/her texts in chats and documents carefully, disregarding job references like the names of roles (for example, in orders and directives). A job title—this is not about the content of the work, i.e., methods/styles/cultures of work! It’s about the authority to manage resources, delegate tasks! It's logistics, management, rational use of resources. The content/methods of work need to be reconstructed independently from the speech, writings, and models of agents participating in the project.

For example,

- For the first five minutes of a "conference call," some "shop supervisor" might take on the role of operational manager (preferences: shorten work timelines, reduce resource usage),
- Then for a couple of minutes as an engineer (for example, a concept developer engineer: preference to identify and align additional usage scenarios that could introduce new features/capabilities to the target system),
- And then as a CNC machine engineer (preference for low complexity in parts processing from the production platform engineer, hence the intention to determine the features of parts processing concerning changed usage scenarios of the machine and newly known deadlines).

You must timely recognize the moment of switching from one role to another during the conversation and respond each time to the correct role, not to "shop supervisor." Respond to the "shop supervisor" only when the question concerns resource management authorities. Only then is it important that the conversation concerns the "supervisor of the unit/workshop," but even here it’s easy to confuse an operational manager, who calculates the optimal distribution of resources without touching the authority to manage them (say, an operational manager issues a work schedule, and specific workers for these tasks are assigned by their supervisors)—and hence it is easy to mix up one resource conversation with another, "resource allocation" with "granting resource management authority."

A theater director doesn't perform in plays, but even if he/she does in emergency situations (an actor got sick or is on vacation, or the budget doesn't allow hiring an actor, and someone had to step in), one **can't understand from the job title what role** **is being played, in which work method he/she has a high level of expertise.** A director, like any supervisor, can disrupt the role play at any moment and perform any role because he/she has the authorization for it (although not the expertise!). A theater director is not Prince Hamlet; it’s just a job title in the organizational chart, not even an acting one.

Manager-supervisor and "operational manager"/"project manager" in classical project management—there's no need to confuse them, although the word used is the same, manager. Manager-supervisor indicates responsibility and authority (a position), not an activity/professional role requiring some level of expertise from the performer. An operational manager is a person who performs the tasks of operational management methods, thus increasing the throughput of work through the organization.

Positions are not roles; they are **organizational places**. Agents as role performers occupy organizational places, thereby becoming an "organizational unit." An organizational position/role has:

- The name of the place ("position" name)
- The authority to manage labor and resources
- The obligation to perform works using certain methods in certain roles
- The obligation to follow orders from their supervisors in higher organizational units.
- A wage rate (some part of the compensation for work gained due to holding the position).

Agents occupying organizational places inherit these authorities and obligations.

If a role performer is also a supervisor, he/she can arbitrarily choose his/her role, trying to substitute for an absent role performer. Certainly, the supervisor may often perform poorly (an engineer-thermite role performer occupying a supervisor position might be a very bad thermite engineer, or might be a very good thermite engineer, but instead of spending two days on the problem, as he/she would if actually performing the role, he/she will spend ten minutes, akin to an actor in a Shakespeare play spending a minute on Hamlet's role and then moving on to other business). But this supervisor-agent might believe that decisions for any subordinate role must be made by him/her, as he/she is the supervisor!

Such a situation is fostered by the organizational culture of "engineers as analysts providing proposals" and "supervisors approving proposals." One of the chief designers of a machine-building plant (note, the word "chief" signifies a position, not a role) recently told the course author that in the evening, he/she finds about two hundred documents in his/her information system for approval. When asked about the quality of decision-making in approving all these engineering "proposals" (two hundred in an evening!), he/she just laughed. Such a system will exist for years unless we start dealing with agents (people, AI, organizations), positions, organizational units as agents-in-positions, roles (and in the course "Systems Management" we will also discuss **organizational capabilities/capabilities** as a reflection of the fact that organizational units have the authority and resources to perform work using some method. One might have the expertise to work using a method, hold a position, but lack the capability to work using that method. A pianist with "expertise in playing the piano" was hired for the "pianist" position to play sonatas in a hotel's lobby because he/she can do it. But the small nuance: no piano was provided. An organizational unit exists, expertise is there, but no organizational capability to play sonatas, thus silence in the hall, "no organizational capability." This situation is no different from a designer who was not provided with CAD tools).

It’s wrong to confuse persons (including people) occupying organizational places and thus holding positions and playing organizational roles as they can (don't shoot the pianist; he/she plays as he/she can) with "professionals" who certainly possess a high level of expertise in performing work using the role's methods. In discussing roles, the performer's professionalism and "level of expertise"/qualification/competency in the role's workflow method are at issue, while for those holding a position, completely different characteristics (responsibility, loyalty, honesty, a tendency not to steal resources) are considered.

The word "manager" confuses everyone: it can be:

- A position "manager," understood as "just a supervisor," although there is also a "sales manager," representing, on the contrary, the lowest rung in the worker hierarchy,
- A role "manager" meaning "organizer," understood as a combined role of an organization designer (designing the role structure in the organization's tasks and proposing the organizational structure of management/reporting), leader (helping people to take organizational places/positions and start performing the roles attached to those positions—becoming organizational units),
- A role "manager" as only one narrow "operational manager," engaging in activities to maximize the throughput efficiency of the organizational system, "organization operator," "organization operations engineer." Such a manager has a clear subject of interest: the flow of materials, information, tasks through the organization's workplaces, interested in maximizing throughput (flow/throughput—the amount of flow per unit of time), the theory/discipline of the operational management method—"operations research" (mathematical performance calculations), considerations from this theory/discipline give the (in this case—operational) manager::role the ability to optimize workload of available resources (literally, he/she::role ensures there are no "bottlenecks"—traffic jams in the flow of semi-finished products through the enterprise). If a malfunction is found in the organization (the flow through the organization is disrupted, "nothing works"), you need to call the manager-organizer::role. Yes, the same agent might be the same, the same role "manager," no need to call anyone, but the types of roles are different, methods of work are different, and it would be good to distinguish between them. In large organizations, people will precisely be different (moreover, the role of operational manager will quickly pass to the computer, the operation of anything today is intensely automated).
- Trendy various positions and roles implying the making of decisions—both administrative (positions) and content-related (roles). For example, product manager ^ [<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_manager>], who makes decisions on the market properties of a product and the priority of launching new features into development (often confused with a project/program manager, product owner, and even stakeholder representative). It is a complex role (implying the performance of many work methods), but as usual, this role can be performed by one performer, many people, and even many organizational units/divisions. In each specific case, you will have to figure out exactly what you're dealing with: and then always work with the methods by which the roles of the agent-in-position operate, taking into account the authority coming from the position.
- Founder of the enterprise/founder, but in fact, he/she is also an "enterprise engineer," so this role is considered managerial. The education of various "technological entrepreneurs" mainly provides intensive organizational management training, i.e., teaching enterprise founders agile methods (e.g., Kanban) in operational management, but also instructs on strategies by aligning different preferences of various roles when performing the role of a businessperson, whose subject of interest is the market price of the enterprise itself. The specificity here can be indicated only by negotiating with external project roles for the enterprise itself, i.e., with investors and regulatory authorities (registration chamber, bank).

**In our course, the term "manager" is primarily used as an engineer of the organization (most often an enterprise, but it can also be an association, holding, or even a swimming club). "Manager" in our course is not a position of a supervisor/director, but a professional role, which is also broken down into numerous subroles!** There is a separate course: "Systems Management," where this is discussed in detail, with the primary methods of management as organizational engineering provided, and the typical subroles of management, "manager roles," are identified.