---
title: Rank and Level of Skill
---

Nothing can be said about the boss's professional interests: they wander, as understood by the agent-in-position in terms of their authority. Similarly, nothing can be said about the labor interests of an agent (often a person) as a bearer of the rank. The words “professor”, “PhD”, “colonel”, or “red-bannered division” tell us nothing except that a person or a division has some experience in some unclear field of activity. A shop of advanced production culture, like a red-bannered regiment: nothing can be said about the working methods (what it does) of the shop or regiment, what roles they perform in these methods, the subject area remains unknown (Genetics? Artillery? Air transportation? Suppression of uprisings?). The title “People’s Artist” doesn’t clarify whether it refers to playing the role of Hamlet or Petrushka in entirely different plays. It’s a general characteristic of the agent-actor but doesn’t specify the subject specificity of the role itself, nor indicate the method of performing the role.

But **the degree of skill**/**qualification**/**competence** of an executor for some role is important. We specifically talk about the degree, not the level of skill, so as not to confuse it with various other levels (ontological in the hierarchy of types/meta-models, system levels in the hierarchy of system dimensions taking into account their nesting). **Levels---** **are usually about hierarchies, degree---** **about the manifestation of some quality.** Although the language doesn’t strictly follow these distinctions, for example, “volume level”, though there are no hierarchies in volume, or “water level”, there too without hierarchy. Yet, we will talk about the degree of skill, not level, understanding that in life these will be synonyms.

Today, qualification is considered not as a set of some separate knowledge, skills, and abilities but as a set of **competencies** sufficient to play some role. Competence means that some tasks the role executor with this competence can perform successfully not only "on an exam" but also in real life, in a real project. Competence in some method includes not only knowledge-skills-abilities but also a personal attitude towards this method, taking on professional role responsibility, self-identification in the role for this method.

In fact, the traditionally used criteria of knowledge-skills-abilities/**KSA** in Russian and Soviet pedagogy do not include the skills of setting tasks in non-greenhouse conditions of real life, whereas competence includes setting tasks in real life for their subsequent solution---finding in life the objects of interest of the role, being a master of the method for which the agent is, being able to maintain the role amidst the hustle and abundance of details irrelevant to the role in life. **Mastery**--- is a part of the personality. **Personality** --- is the sum of all mastery of the agent, who besides personality (“mastery in some methods of work”) also has an organism (“apparatus for the personality as a set of mastery”) and even tools can be considered, enhancing the capabilities of the personality in part of some methods (say, a notepad as a memory enhancer for the mastery of thinking).

Personality manifests itself through the behavior of the organism-expanded-with-tools of the agent. Of course, the skill of “performing some method”/“playing some role according to the method's script/algorithm” in particular and personality as a whole, as the sum of all such skills--- these are functional objects that represent agent constructs (brain, computer, and the body of a human or robot as a whole, plus additional method tools--- we consider the agent with their tools) of creators/constructors, acting according to the work methods algorithms as “algorithms of transformations” (we remember that constructor theory gives us a theoretical generalization of universal computers/information processors according to some algorithms to universal transformers of the physical environment into some material results according to some algorithms). More details about personality and its mastery, training in mastery (personal development), and assessment of mastery will be in the course “Personality Engineering”.

An actor possessing the skill degree of knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) for the role of Prince Hamlet will quite be able to play Prince Hamlet in rehearsals, at most--- in a graduation performance with carefully selected viewers. We can only guess how he will behave on some tour in a rural outback, and not necessarily in his own country. A competent actor in playing the role of Prince Hamlet will be able to play Prince Hamlet somewhere in the thick of a chaotic crowd (usual conditions in projects!), and when he has to communicate with Yorick's skull, for the lack of a skull, he will adapt some potato or at least some paper with a drawn skull---and he will make this “skull” himself, inventing how to do it. But most importantly--- someone with sufficient mastery will find among the crowd the rest of the missing participants of the play and will be able to organize his role dialogues with them, involving all around him!

He can fit his labor in the role into the labor of the whole collective playing the play/role play (we call such qualification/competence a “practitioner”), and ultimately--- organize the collective to perform new tasks for it. We call such a qualification “master”, although this is a narrow meaning of the term “master”. A broader meaning--- “bearer of mastery”. More meanings of the word “master” will be described in our courses in the course “Personality Engineering”.

Mastery includes some applied/narrow intelligence for the subject area of mastery. We have already noted that fundamental intelligence is independent of the subject area, but in sufficiently broad subject areas the number of possible objects of attention and actions with them is large enough so that to perform the method, the agent-in-role must have a general ability to handle the situation, “narrow, but intelligent”. Mastery in some broad area usually includes the ability to cope with tasks in the subject area of some method, which neither the master as a bearer of mastery, nor his teacher has encountered. Roughly speaking, if in a play/game a situation arises where a line is needed that wasn’t in the role script (in a project--- perform an operation that wasn’t in the training course), then the master will deliver that line (in the project--- perform the operation he wasn’t taught), even if it means changing the type of mastery (if your car engine stalls or its electric drive breaks down, then the mastery of the driver won’t help you, you’d need to switch to the mastery of a mechanic or call some agent who has such mastery). In applied mastery, intelligence (both applied/narrow and fundamental/universal) plays a huge role, because one must always be on alert: in life, when performing the method, something regularly goes “wrong” as in the knowledge/theory/explanations of this method, and one needs to quickly comprehend what to do in this case.

One can generally move away from pedagogical slang (both old with knowledge-skills-abilities and new “competence-based”) and simply talk about skill at performing a method, the skill of playing some role, the skill at a given (professional) position. A boss, having begun (often unnoticed to themselves) to play some operational/professional/functional role (for example, an engineer-architect, because they noticed that no one is playing this role, but there are already several groups of developers whose work needs to be urgently adjusted in terms of organizing the interfaces between the autonomous modules of the system being created) can be either a master in this matter, or a well-trained novice, or not understood at all in system architecture. It’s important to understand not only which role a person is playing, but also what degree of their mastery in performing the method of this role. Because if there’s no mastery, then in the project, it will be necessary to find someone who really knows how to perform the tasks by the method and thus will qualitatively play this role, otherwise, there will be no successful project. You cannot look for a “role executor”, you need to look for “someone who can work by the necessary method, possessing a high degree of skill in working by the necessary method”--- then appoint him as the role executor and also use the leadership::method so that the appointed role executor is genuinely engaged in the tasks by the method and cooperates in this with the rest of the role executors. You need to get results, this is achieved by performing tasks by some methods, not just any tasks. **You don’t just need a “role executor”, you need him to be able to work by the method of this role!**

Questions about methods and selecting people-executors of roles for these methods--- are different questions! First, you need to say, "we need exact measurements, these methods are practiced in metrology", then "thus we need a metrologist", and only then select people for the role according to their degree of mastery in performing exact measurements. So, the degree of skill/**qualification**/**competence** of Masha in precise measurements, that is, as a metrologist--- zero, Petya has never performed tasks by methods of metrology, but took a metrology course in college five years ago (that is, he has small non-zero mastery in metrology), while Aristarkh Nikanorovich defended his doctoral dissertation in metrology a month ago---his mastery in metrology is higher than required to perform the work of a metrologist in the current project.