---
title: Fundamentality/transdisciplinarity of Systems Thinking
---

Only after discovering the target system in its environment (the first step of attention in systems thinking is always outside the boundary of the target system!) as a "black box", can one then look inside this "black box" and see what subsystems must exist so that their interactions provide the system's function relative to its environment. Only the second step of thinking can be inside the boundaries of the target system, the first step is always from the boundaries of the target system to the environment! If you do not know what is required from the system as a whole, describing the parts of the system and their interactions will not help you. If you do not know, you need to measure time with your sensor, or air pressure, or water temperature, no discussion of the sensor's internals will help you. But we know the role of the "sensor"? Isn't that enough? No, it's too general a type, in the previous section we already discussed that too general names do not help, we need to figure out what exactly needs to be measured, with what accuracy, how much the measurement could cost and how long it should take, in what format and where to transmit the measurement data. This is all about the sensor as a black box. And only after these clarifications can we discuss from which functional parts this sensor must be made to provide the needed function, and then look for affordances in constructive objects to implement the functional device system idea.

We will need the following concepts:

-   **breakdown** of the **system** (and there will be four main ones, which we will describe in the next subsection). It’s important that breakdown as a hierarchy of part-whole/composition relationships belongs to the physical world, it really exists. If you have gears of a mechanical clock hanging on the wall in your room, these gears are related to the clock as parts to a whole. And these are relationships between real objects, it is not a description of relationships! We distinguish breakdown from the description of the breakdown - it is information (model) about parts and wholes. In life, of course, very often "breakdown" refers not to the breakdown itself, but to the description of the breakdown, and even more often - a document with a description of the breakdown. But it’s one thing to have a clock divided into a case, gears, dial, hands, springs, and another thing - a computer file containing a description of this breakdown. The breakdown is in the clock itself, and in the file - the description/model/information of the breakdown.
-   **description** of the **system** - in the simplest case, it will be a description of the breakdown, but descriptions can be very different. For example, functional (role-based) breakdown gives functional parts of the system (subsystems). Using the knowledge of these parts, we can describe some flows (of energy, substances, information) between the parts at one or even several system levels, obtaining a "schematic diagram". Or we can describe some physical characteristics of the system as a whole, depending on time and the set, and the state of the subsystems (so-called 1D modeling). The main thing to remember here is that, in addition to breakdown descriptions, there are many other descriptions.

And here we again face the fundamentality/transdisciplinarity of the systemic approach: many different project roles are present in system-related projects, which work with very different subjects of methods in different ways, and each of them, guided by their role interests/preferences and creatively realizing them, will offer their own version of the system description, advantageous for the realization of the preferences of this particular role to the detriment of the realization of the preferences of other roles.

Including **roles will offer** **their** **vision of the system breakdown** into parts. The system will be the same **(they will agree on it when making the usage concept), and the division into parts from different roles - different.** **And then these parts (even if they agree on** **what they are) can be described in very different ways.** **And, of course, during the discussion of the system concept -** **agree that all these different system descriptions (including different descriptions of breakdowns) correspond to one system, not different ones.**

Someone::role is interested in **the functions of parts** during operation::time and will say that the teapot consists of the functional parts of the container, the pouring spout, the filling hole in the container, the handle on the container, the lid, and the handle on the lid, and also the steam release hole in the lid (otherwise, when closing the wet lid, water will splash out of the spout), all this is "for what is needed". Another::role talks about the fact that the teapot consists of only two **details** (that is, non-disassemblable parts) in the **design** of the teapot, which need to be manufactured because their subjects of interest/important characteristics lie in the manufacturing time of the teapot, the subject of interest here is the design, "what to make it of". A third::role says that the lid and teapot should be stored nearby, it would be better if the lid were right on the teapot, objects of interest in **placement**, "where in the Universe are the parts of the working teapot located". A fourth says that the main thing in the teapot is its **cost**, so it would be better not to make it out of gold and not too fancy a shape, to make it cheaper to form, and then it should not break and not lose heat, so as to avoid repair costs and make the operation of the teapot cheaper (and here part of the descriptions relates to the time of operation, and part - to the time of manufacturing).

The fundamentality/transdisciplinarity here is that the systemic approach initially agrees with the multiplicity of system descriptions at each system level and is ready to work with these descriptions, coming from different applied/private/subject methods (material science, tea culture, dishware production, etc.) with their different knowledge/disciplines/theories/algorithms and tools supporting this knowledge. Systems thinking "beyond disciplines"/"at the basis of thinking about disciplines" all these methods of work of all these very different project roles, which employ very different applied methods:

-   Systems thinking takes into account **different types of descriptions that we make** **for systems** **at each system level**, because due to emergence, new properties need to be described at each new system level. We already said that the description of the work of cells in the muscles of a dancer is absolutely not the same as the description of his performance, the description of the work of a battery in an electric car is absolutely not the same as the description of the movement of this electric car from Moscow to Vladivostok, the description of people's thinking methods is absolutely not the same as the description of the work methods of neurons in the human brain. Systems thinking, as the use of fundamental/subject-independent/transdisciplinary concepts of the systemic approach, takes into account all these applied descriptions; it is common for reasoning about them; it is transdisciplinary in relation to the descriptions of individual applied methods. We always use it, regardless of the applied subject area.
-   Systems thinking takes into account **different types of descriptions that we make at one system level**, because different project roles have different interests in systems at this level and to satisfy these interests, they need to build some applied models of these systems that help them predict the desired system behavior. Some project roles want to know how exactly the system works within itself to perform a role/function in the supersystem, while other project roles want to know what the system is made of/designed, third are interested in where all these parts of the system are located in the Universe, fourth are interested in financial questions regarding the system, fifth are interested in work on creating and developing the system (that is, the behavior of the creators of the system), and so on - over all subjects of interest of all roles.

System descriptions are carried out by very different methods and help very different applied roles reach an agreement regarding the system, work methods for its creation, regarding the work itself, and resource use, as well as the system development. System descriptions not only are performed by different methods of these descriptions but also support the work of various applied methods because systems thinking as a method of thinking with its set of concepts is "beyond" (trans-) this multitude of descriptions, systems thinking does not disappear when discussing questions of other disciplines, it permeates all reasoning in the project - and thereby allows reconciling all these system descriptions into a non-contradictory whole. "To reconcile all these descriptions" means that different applied roles (of applied types of engineering, management), united by systems thinking, **agree** on what system needs to be made, as well as on how successful it turns out to be, whether the decisions made are justified.

In conditions of modern labor division in complex projects, visionaries make their rational decisions, developers - their decisions, architects and "security officers" - their decisions, engineers of the internal production platform - theirs, managers also make roughly the same set of decisions with roughly the same role division, only regarding organizations in the creation graph. Systems thinking - is part of the methods of thinking the intellect stack, so it does not "turn off" when applied reasoning of all these roles takes place. Systems thinking helps to keep the attention of all roles on important project objects, on which agreements will need to be reached. Systems thinking highlights contradictions in descriptions and raises the question of reaching agreements on these collisions in front of all roles participating in the project. Descriptions of systems thinking do not replace applied descriptions; they define types for applied descriptions of very different other disciplines used in the project. Each role cannot say what other descriptions need to be made, and then what to do with these descriptions in terms of resolving contradictions. Each role deals only with its own descriptions, and systems thinking tells that there are many descriptions, prompts which of them are the most important and cannot be omitted, and also forces everyone to agree on these descriptions.