---
title: Functional Analysis and Modular Synthesis
---

Each work/professional/project role, due to the specifics of its interests, sees a partial description of the system as a "transparent box," consisting of the types of parts that interest it, allowing it to discuss its areas of interest. For example, an “Operations Manager”::role is not interested in how the system works (functional description), but in "what it is made of" (constructs) and the logistics of these constructive parts to the assembly site, and after assembly — to the place of sale. Operational managers are not interested in "system functionality," but are interested in the construction of the system; they will manage the configuration, "so nothing gets lost, everything is assembled, and nothing is mixed up." Management/management — is usually not about functionality, it is about logistics! It's about "on time, timely, nothing lost, everything handed over, all engineering tasks completed." The focus of operational management as a method of work for an operational manager includes constructive parts undergoing state changes during the creators' work.

However, an engineer-developer, considering the calculation of the operating/work/operational modes of some system, first thinks about "how it works" (**functional analysis** based on functional decomposition) to ensure that the interaction of functional parts-subsystems results in/emerges the required function of the entire system, and then will necessarily address "what to assemble from" (**modular synthesis/assembly,** selecting affordances-constructs from constructive decomposition for the functional parts of the system). Modular synthesis for an engineer-developer will not be immediate, but will occur when the developer, through functional analysis, understands what specific operational/work modes are needed, and what characteristics are required from subsystems to select the necessary affordances of constructs/modules.

It is not customary to talk about "functional synthesis." The focus is on functional decomposition and functional analysis (analysis — is also "fragmentation"). In the analysis, we take a functional object (role) in the supersystem and look for its decomposition/fragmentation into subsystems, also functional objects. For constructs as material objects — we take various material objects-constructs (materiality here emphasizes existence not only during the system’s operation but also during its creation, and even outside the project — "on their own") and seek affordances/matches in them to assemble from these affordances-constructs such a super-construct that will "play the required role"/"embody the functional object" during use. That is, the constructs seem to be synthesized/assembled from material parts, and functional objects, on the contrary, are only fragmented — this is a logical description of the method. In reality, all this happens iteratively and with various conjectures over a fairly long time, because it is an optimization, an iterative process across many projects, many versions of the system. It should be particularly noted that both functional and constructive objects are types of physical objects. A functional object is physical when its role is played by a constructive material object (i.e., the material for the physicality of the functional object doesn’t come from "nowhere", but from the material object that is set to play the role, perform the assigned function).

Note that engineering necessarily includes both functional/systems analysis (systems are usually primarily described by their roles, functions — that’s why functional and systems analysis are synonymous) and modular synthesis. **We have a course of comprehensive** **systems thinking, where analysis and synthesis are given equal attention.** **This is not just a course on systems analysis, which is a very small and limited part of systems thinking!**

Those who engage only in analysis (functional/systems or any other) are dreamers who have no chance of changing the world. The world needs changing physically. For this, certain constructs/products/modules must begin to embody the functional parts of the system, i.e., must be physically assembled to start interacting. It’s not enough to understand how the system works, to think about the system, discuss the system, analyze it — the system must be embodied in the physical world, for this modular synthesis must be performed, i.e., design/engineer the system constructively from constructs, manufacture the constructs, assemble the system from them, debug its operation, further develop this system, release many constantly improved versions of the system. This is all the work of "synthetics," not "analysts." An engineer is someone who thinks and does, not just an analyst who only thinks and is not involved in works related to changing the world.

This is exactly the same reasoning as for the performers of human roles in plays. If you only write plays, prescribe roles and behaviors well, but do not think about the embodiment of these plays by actors (including robots and animals!), it's fair to consider it just literature, not dramaturgy. Actors will fly, dissolve in air, give lines telepathically: if you don't extend thought to reality, everything is possible! A playwright and director of a play usually imagine that their play will live in reality, performed on a very limited stage for a very limited time, and there will also be a limited number of viewers in the audience — thoughts and emotions of characters cannot be conveyed to the audience as it can be done in literature by simply giving descriptions. No, everything must be expressed through acting, that's what dramaturgy, scripting of plays, is about, not just “writing” as such.

Engineering thinking should not be just analytical, speculative, it must be adequate, i.e., not lose connection with the physical world, not just stay in the clouds, but aim to change the world for the better, to create and develop systems, and it is not enough to just explain the world, analyze systems!

Therefore, a systems thinker doesn’t limit themselves to the operating time but is also involved in development time. They definitely distinguish at least four areas/fields of interest (and this is just the beginning, usually, these zones/fields of interest are more, and in each, there are many topics of interest):

-   functional/role-based,
-   constructive/material/modular,
-   spatial (combining functional and constructive within the framework of 4D extensionalism, the relation of realization is shown by the fact that functional and constructive parts occupy the same space-time, so space-time is introduced explicitly),
-   cost/expense/economic/resource.

**Analysis/decomposition is always only part of thinking! Beware of a project where it is not clear who makes decisions on synthesis! Synthesis changes the world, analysis does not change the world! Only synthesis decisions change the world!**

**Who has the right to indicate that the rocket will have three stages? That there will be three departments in the enterprise? That Vasya Pupkin will play the role of Prince Hamlet, and Dasha Nevrubkina will not? It's certainly not analysts!** **These are engineers who change the world, not just understand it!**

"Analyst" here is a role, not a position. An agent (person or even an entire organization) in the position of an "analyst" can well perform both the role of an analyst and the role of a synthesizer/constructor, i.e., make decisions on functional decomposition, functional analysis, and modular synthesis. But it would be better to call such a position, with a person making decisions about changing the world, otherwise, “engineer”: project participants do not expect "analysts" to have decision-making authority to change the world and hence are not inclined to discuss decisions on modular synthesis with people in analytical positions.

Typically, such decisions on assigning constructive parts of the system to role/functional parts are made by a design engineer, relying on principles of dividing the system into constructive parts and describing the connections of these constructive parts prepared by a system architect (this is the essential part of concept creation for the system — assigning affordances-constructs to subsystem roles). Thus, an analyst is only a part of a design engineer and part of a system architect. Today, a separate analyst is considered more like a "broken telephone" between the outside world and the engineer who makes the decision. How you name the yacht is how it will sail. Rename an analyst an engineer, and you will see how they start taking responsibility for decisions made (not just for analytical "understanding" and "identified problems"), and the people around will recognize these decisions, not considering them merely "analyst recommendations" for some engineer. More about this is explained in the "Systems Engineering" and "Systems Management" courses.

"Enterprise Engineer"/manager::role for "enterprise engineering"/management::method. Org-designers and org-architects/"enterprise architects" understand that they are essentially engineers of organizations::system (sometimes they directly refer to themselves as organizational systems engineers). Sometimes org-designers and org-architects call themselves enterprise engineers to distinguish themselves from "just managers," implying they are not "operations managers" and do not engage in enterprise operations time methods, i.e., they are not "enterprise operators" and do not deal with administration but create and develop the enterprise. Remember, MBA is a degree of master of business administration, management in conversation narrows down to administration. Org-developers and org-designers emphasize that they use systems engineering standards in enterprise engineering, treating the organization as a system.

Leaders (those who implement organizational changes, analogs of process engineers in mechanical engineering, i.e., "specialists in changing the physical world, manufacturing the system embodiment") take the concept of the organization from org-designers and org-architects (specializing the system concept for an org-system: decisions on realization/embodiment of org-roles by org-units, considering org-architectural solutions) and further "manufacture" the enterprise itself according to these descriptions, explaining the org-roles from the functional description of the organization to agents at each job position in the org-structure as a constructive breakdown of the organization. Leaders "catalyze cooperation" by creating an atmosphere where each agent-employee performs their roles qualitatively, regardless of where their workplace is located (description of placements) and with whom these agent-employees have to interact under the inevitability of productive conflicts between the interests of roles played by agents-employees.

Of course, all this is explained in detail in the "Systems Management" course, here we just need to emphasize that **leaders take the organizational concept from** **org-designers and** **org-architects, i.e., from** **"synthetics",** **not analysts, and** **if the organizational concept is missing, then leaders have nothing to do literally —** **if there is no org-project, it is unclear what to explain to employees in terms of labor division in the project**. Org-analytics is performed as necessary by the people performing the engineering roles of org-designers and org-architects. Some "department head," organizing their department, performs the roles of an org-designer and leader (together these roles can be combined as the role of "org-development manager"), and also the org-architect of this department, and may also perform roles in the applied engineering project of "their system" (for them, it will be "our system," sometimes even coinciding with the target), for example, a system architect — the smaller the enterprise, the more roles one agent plays.

And, of course, "functional analysis" and "modular synthesis" are only two aspects of system description. In engineering (the target system, personality, enterprise, community), one must understand all the main (four or even five) aspects during analysis and synthesis, and a greater number of aspects — for besides the main ones, there may be others. Systems thinking is precisely about finding a suboptimal solution for synthesis (how to embody the function with construction, how to assemble it in space with costs not higher than those project role holders are willing to pay, and with work that can be feasibly completed with available resources within foreseeable timeframes), satisfying all project roles.

You won’t achieve the optimal in synthesis; there are always many suboptimal (clearly worse than optimal, "the least bad of the known to us," not "the best of the known good") solutions of about the same quality based on SoTA ideas (remembering the unsettlements from conflicts between different system levels), you must guess at least some of the suboptimal solutions, choose one of them. The rational choice of a project solution among those proposed during synthesis is often also called "analysis," while there is a resource constraint on this choice of a solution for synthesis — we avoid analysis paralysis^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analysis_paralysis>].

Systems/modular synthesis is always multi-criteria optimization, which goes on at many system levels simultaneously, based on **hunches/hypotheses/inventions** that have undergone numerous justifications. **If you managed to more deeply reconcile all descriptions** **by all main types** **of decomposition** **of the designed system,** **and even add some additional types,** **there is a big chance that you will have** **(temporary, only for the current moment)** **success compared to all competitors, who consider descriptions by fewer aspects.**