---
title: Apples from Life, Apples from Problem
---

In the real world, we see specific physical objects that we deal with:

-   If it's about the task of invention, then this is a physical object (which can have roles, constructs, places, etc.). Functional objects exist only when they are embodied by a construct in the necessary space-time location.
-   If it's about tracking the states of the method's objects, then it’s “work products”/artifacts (physical objects, but some of these objects can be documentation, and then we are interested not in the physical object itself but its description). The states of the alpha as an object of the method can only be tracked through work products, not “speculatively.”

Physical objects (including work products) can be touched, kicked, pointed at with a finger (a symbolic finger if they are too small), loaded into a cart (if they are not too large). They have space and extend over time (beginning to exist at some moment and disappearing at another).

In the real world, we see constructs or artifacts “apples” and actions with them as objects of different methods, for example, “eat apples,” “count apples.” Apples are thus represented by two different types of objects from two different theories/knowledges/ontologies/disciplines/models/explanations/algorithms of two different methods:

-   Type “food” from the method “eat” (food::“object of the method” eat::“way/method of work”).
-   Type “countable object” from the method “count objects” (“countable object”::“object of the method” count::method).

**If you don’t know the method of work, then you don’t know the type of object (it will be a type from an unknown to you theory/ontology/explanations of an unknown method). If you don’t guess the type of object as the type of the object of some method, then you will not understand what and how to do with this** **object ---** **this will be a problem, “I don’t know what to do in this situation: which objects to consider and what to do with them to get the desired result.”**

**This is the connection between life and** **the course or** **textbook: you must figure out here what type from the meta-model (subject area) and meta-meta-model (fundamental disciplines: physics, mathematics, logic, including the types of objects from the Systems approach) from the textbooks encountered in life.** **And if the method says that an object of some type should be ---** **then you need to actively search for this object (and sometimes create it if you can’t find it) and then bring it to the state dictated by the theory of the method, by the actions set by the algorithm of the method, that is, work according to the method. Remember: the method is performed, and the discipline/theory only describes the method, so you also need to guess what the method is and what tools are hidden behind the discipline, what skill will be required ---** **and then act!**

Here we need to tell a story about apples from a problem and from life, for example, in this variant^[<http://yandex.ru/yandsearch?text=%D1%8F%D0%B1%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%BA%D0%B8+%2F%2B1+%D0%B8%D0%B7+%2F%2B1+%D0%B7%D0%B0%D0%B4%D0%B0%D1%87%D0%B8&lr=213>]:

a teacher who had read about the didactic function of visual aids came to \... school and believed that everything had to be taught using visual aids. And they were working on an addition problem: “3+5.” She brought three apples and five more apples, laid them on the table, and said, “Children, you see here --- one--two--three --- three apples, and here --- one--two--three--four--five --- five apples. Now I combine them, how many apples in total?” The children stared at the apples, drooling, but didn’t understand the problem. The second day passed, the third --- a record: usually, they passed this in one day. She came to the teachers’ room and complained that she was using new methods, all visually, but there was no result. And on the fifth day, a hand stretched from the back desk, and a student said, “Ma'am, I now understand: these apples you laid out on the table are not real --- they are apples from the problem.” --- “Yes, and what?” --- “Well then, ma'am, that's a completely different matter.” And from that moment when the class realized that these were not real apples but apples from a problem, everything clicked. Why? When you put real apples --- what needs to be done with them? They need to be eaten. But for counting, you need drawings.

Here's more of the same^[[https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Золотой\_ключик,\_или\_Приключения\_Буратино](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Золотой_ключик,_или_Приключения_Буратино)]:

--- Let’s do some arithmetic\... You have two apples in your pocket\...

Pinocchio winked slyly:

--- You lie, not one\...

--- I say, --- the girl patiently repeated, --- assume you have two apples in your pocket. Someone took one apple from you. How many apples do you have left?

--- Two.

--- Think carefully.

Pinocchio squinted, --- thought really hard.

--- Two\...

--- Why?

--- I won't give that Someone an apple, even if they fight!

--- You have no aptitude for mathematics, --- the girl said sadly.

About physical bodies from a physics textbook (the discipline/theory/thinking of physics, documented in the textbook), we know that with the presence of gravity they fly::move::method in a parabola. Acceleration and mass are the characteristics of physical bodies as objects of methods/ways of movement. If you throw a stone and can't relate it to a “physical body” as an object of the method “mechanical movement,” you can't say it will fly in a parabola! There are no textbooks describing the flights::“mechanical movement”::method of just stones as objects of the method! Richard Feynman in his physics teaching notes regretted precisely this: physics students worldwide cannot relate their excellent textbook knowledge to the surrounding physical world phenomena^[<http://www.abitura.com/modern_physics/Feynman1.html>].

There are countless artifacts by which types of method objects (alphas) “from the textbook” are realized, you can’t write textbooks about each of them! Therefore, textbooks write about alphas as typical method objects: a short text from a textbook can thus be applied to thousands of life situations, textbooks are written at a certain level of abstraction, they don't describe specific objects and too narrow types.

Alpha is not just a method object but only such a method object, changes of which are important for tracking during the project. Alphas are needed to manage attention to changes in the project. But the reasoning about the method objects and the fact that it's not easy to find these objects in life, even if they are described in the textbook, fully applies to alphas.

Alpha is usually not very formally specified. Ontologists/methodologists insisting on strict and unambiguous formalization of the world remain dissatisfied with how alphas are defined. The alphas themselves appeared as follows: the OMG Essence development team asked the question: what is present in every software development project? What method objects change their states in every software development method (software process)? And in 2011-2013, they reviewed about 250 specific software development projects, arriving at the proposed set of 7 basic alphas of the standard (kernel in the terms of this standard, this set of “example kernels” from the standard we stopped using in our course, it is hopelessly outdated and very specific to software). And what they found, they found: no additional formalization, bringing to a single ontological type for alphas (the method concepts themselves, alphas, work products --- language in the terms of this standard, kernel objects are typed by language objects) was done.

The task of a thinking person is to match the description of method objects from the textbook as a type for playing them in life, work products as physical objects in their various hypostases, and descriptions from documents as work products. Only after this can theoretical knowledge from the textbook be applied to real-life situations. There is nothing more practical than a good theory (knowledge/explanations/discipline/ontology/algorithm) if you recognize objects with types from this theory in life, that is, if your attention can capture some corresponding objects from the surrounding colorful background of various objects in the project.

An example when the inability to work with types combines with ignorance of the basics of Systems thinking can be the discussion among active inference/pacragement approach developers (in which you change your world and self models in cognition but actively --- changing not only models but yourself and the world!). The concept of Markov blanket was proposed as a “system boundary,” but “strangely” --- the strangeness was noted^[<http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/19726/>] and sparked a huge discussion^[<https://www.reddit.com/r/PredictiveProcessing/comments/rycjcg/commentaries_on_the_emperors_new_markov_blankets/>]. If the discussion participants were familiar with modern fundamental thinking, including Systems thinking, they would quickly find three sources of confusion (all are noted in our course as important for thinking):

-   Confusion about whether the Markov blanket is a mathematical/mental object or a physical one (say, the boundary of a cell is meant geometrically as a mathematical object, or it's the boundary of a cell in the physical world, and then what it consists of and its thickness?)
-   Confusion between a functional and a constructive object. Is the Markov blanket a functional object with some behavior, or a physical object or group that will demonstrate the corresponding behavior? Is the boundary of a cell with some behavior irrespective of what it consists of, or do we clearly understand that it's about the cell membrane, or a membrane “with everything attached to it inside and outside.”
-   Confusion between the concept of **interface** and **interface module**. Interface --- is the boundary between two constructs/modules, ensuring their connection during work, while the interface module --- is a construct having two interfaces: one specified and discussed outside the system, and the other “inside the system.” Thus, the Bluetooth interface --- is the junction/boundary between two systems, the method of working of systems at this junction, and the objects of this method are described by the Bluetooth interface standard, while the Bluetooth interface module --- is some chip, having on one side the very Bluetooth interface, and on the other side an interface to the rest of the electronics inside the system, some pins through which signals and power go. And this is still not a complete description, as we did not touch the antenna question as an interface module: on one side it has the high-frequency electric signal interface of Bluetooth standard, and on the other side the interface of Bluetooth radio waves --- and this antenna either is part of the Bluetooth interface module or not. Discussing a living cell: is the Markov blanket there an interface (zero physical dimensions, “interface”: that which is between modules) or an interface module? Because in conversation it’s either the cell boundary on the outer membrane, or the cell membrane having both an interface to the external environment and another interface to the internal environment.

All these discussions could be greatly shortened using Systems thinking: quickly agree that for the discussion we need not one concept/type of Markov blanket, but a whole set of concepts/types: system description, system embodiment, functional part, constructive part, interface, interface module with two interfaces. Using the single concept/type of Markov blanket for all this --- is to delay the project for a long time due to total misunderstanding of what exactly is being discussed!

Usually, those engaged in our course go through the following stages when studying Systems thinking:

1.  **Understand nothing because they can't relate the course material** **to** **the world around them** **(that is, the types of objects from the course to the objects around).** Indeed, in their engineering, managerial, cultural projects there are no alphas as method objects changing their states during the project. And in the course, there is no description of work products they have in their projects: juicy grapes, thick crude oil, excited crowds, and angry headlines in political media, informational models of a building, and marketing staff skills. Moreover, every project is unique --- there’s nothing common in them (they all work with very limited kinds of systems tied to specific scales), and the course is the same for these very different projects (scale-free and as de-anthropomorphized as possible in its descriptions)! And these projects are not described in the course, specific examples from them are not given (**although in the literature the course refers to,** **these examples are many! Are you looking at that literature through the links? Examples are there!**). With a physics textbook at this stage it's exactly the same: no physical bodies are found in kitchen and production situations, and not one chapter of the physics textbook describes these situations! Strange questions arise like “what situations is what’s in the textbook applicable to” --- expecting that a situation will be found where for Systems thinking there will be a “target system,” and for mechanics there will be a “physical body.” But it’s not about “an obvious situation will be found,” but about simply performing the operation of assigning a type, as discussed in the course “Rational Work.” Further, in all courses, just various types are described, which need to be assigned to objects of the surrounding world. These are the types of different methods of work --- thinking methods, description methods, creation methods.
2.  **Understand everything about the provided course examples,** **and about** **projects of classmates and colleagues,** **but still understand nothing about their own projects.** Of course, because others' projects are “projects from another problem” (remember, “apples from the problem --- they can be counted”), and their own projects --- are “real my projects” (“apples from life,” they need to be eaten!). That is, with types we work on others' projects, because we don’t know the details of these projects, “everything is transparent, it’s all like in the textbook.” If you don’t know the project details, not involved in it, you quickly find the main thing, ask questions about it, inclined to act according to the course's manner. You are focused because details don't distract your attention!
3.  **Understand everything about their projects and others' projects. But don't do anything from what is understood,** **because Systems** **thinking is studied not to be applied** **(that is, to compile and fill tables with important for tracking in the project objects), but** **“for self-education and development,” “for passing the test”** **and so on.** Applying knowledge is hindered by bosses, routine, laziness, lack of like-minded people, no help in applying knowledge. This is true for physics as well. They will solve the task on static friction from the physics task book, but why it is so hard to move a table across the kitchen remains a mystery! Congratulations, you are an analyst, not a practitioner! Qualification degree in SSM --- “specialist.”
4.  **Apply course material** **in their projects because it turns out to be of higher quality, easier, and eventually faster to work this way.** Very often, this happens only a year or two after getting acquainted with the course, after gaining some fluency in using Systems approach concepts. This was detailed in the first section of our course. With the physics textbook (or any other textbooks), it's about the same: it takes time to gain mastery in the method. Of course, this is not about the “ten thousand hours rule” for achieving mastery^[<https://vc.ru/flood/17116-10000-rule-not-work>], but usually for serious methods it’s about years of deliberate practice, not a couple of months. Our experience shows that for mastering Systems thinking, a couple of years are enough, but in that couple of years, you need to raise your experience in other fundamental thinking methods (to set the fluent work of the “types machine,” learn to hold yourself in rational thinking, raise the level of focus, and so on). It’s like in sports: after three months of training, the results usually won’t be visible, but after a couple of years of training, there will be substantial differences from “people on the street,” after a decade of training --- you can think about championships. This is the SSM qualification level of “practitioner.”
5.  **Apply course material to organize the activities of other people** **on the scale of an organization or even a community.** More on this --- in the courses “Systems Management” and the upcoming course “Community Engineering.” Here, it's not just about organizing your own work according to some method, but organizing other people to work by the method. SSM qualifications here --- “master” for organizing work of people on the enterprise scale and “reformer” for organizing work of people on the community scale.