---
title: 'Systems Engineering: Engineering Based on the Systems Approach'
---

Most actively after physics, biology, cybernetics, and thereafter management, but before the latest developments on the link between physics and biology, the systems approach in the 20th century was developed in **systems engineering**.

In Russian translations of engineering literature, managers often do not bother to translate the word engineering as "инженерия", leaving it as "инжиниринг". It's understandable that "systems engineering" and "systems engineering" are synonyms, but there's a small problem: in Russia, in places where engineering management is dealt with rather than engineering, it is also called "systems engineering"—although no engineering solutions (i.e., changes to the design and characteristics of a system) are made, it’s only about engineering decisions regarding the system-creator as an organizational system. These decisions in "systems engineering" are also made using the systems approach, but they mainly concern organizing the work of the project team's effort to create the **system-of-interest**. In the original systems engineering, when considering a project for creating a super-duper stool::"system-of-interest," the main focus was on the features of this stool and the methods of its creation. However, in "systems engineering" in its Russian version, very little would be said about the stool itself, but we would learn everything about how the team of creators of this stool behaves and is organized. This is also important but is systems engineering of organization::"system-creator," that is, systems management.

We will consider "engineering" and "engineering" as synonyms, but in the case of "engineering," we recommend double-checking if it’s not actually management (organizational engineering) being referred to instead of engineering work with the system-of-interest (i.e., whether the "engineering" involves changing the system-of-interest, or if it's done in some other form of engineering alongside the "engineering").

Ancient engineering worked with the substance, where there were no significant computations except for the simplest "feedback" like the Watt's governor on a steam engine. Modern systems engineering primarily deals with cyber-physical systems, which typically include robots, missiles, airliners, autonomous/unmanned vehicles.

Already in the twenty-first century, systems engineers began to say that there were no restrictions on the types of systems based on their levels of organization/evolutionary levels/systems levels for systems engineering. This means changing matter to produce a soap dish or a match, changing matter to produce an airliner, changing people (they also need to be healed and educated), changing organizations (they need to be designed and developed), communities, societies, and even humanity itself—all these changes in the physical world for the better are led by systems engineers. In all these cases, it's about a multi-level view of objects: both the soap dish and the match are considered as parts of something whole (objects in the situations of using the soap dish and the match) and have some parts themselves, but society is also part of the whole humanity and also has its parts. Any work to improve the physical world turned out to be engineering, and it was about the most general and universal, scale-free engineering—systems engineering.

The International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE) sent engineers back to school to study social theories/disciplines to be prepared for such a turn of events and called upon systems engineers to take responsibility for the entire Earth: if not them, who have systems thinking, then who!^[<https://incose-ru.livejournal.com/49015.html>].

Since then, life has shown that it was not so much engineers who went back to school to become politicians as engineers of society or managers as engineers of organizations (although many people became managers as well). No, on the contrary: people considering themselves politicians and managers began to work using engineering methods.

Even in propaganda campaigns, needs are first identified, then designed, implemented, feedback is obtained, the project and methods are adjusted, and this is done continuously rather than one-off while also exploiting the results of the past part of the campaign. Amazingly, such a simple and understandable way to describe work aimed at changing the surrounding world and its necessity was formulated more or less clearly by systems engineers. Simplicity and clarity, of course, are only relative: such a view of the world had to be learned.

The unification of considering various projects aimed at improving the world and thus drastically increasing the simplicity of describing the most diverse system-of-interests of various projects was based on the idea of the system as a piece of the world selected from the environment that needs to be changed (transforming material into a part, turning a student into a master, turning a non-indoctrinated society into an indoctrinated one). Further, it was postulated that this piece of the world (**system-of-interest**) at the moment of its use brings irreparable benefit, changing the world for the better (the part makes some "iron" device operable, the master performs useful work, the indoctrinated society supports its existence). All these changes are done more or less alike with a general systems view of very different systems, despite the differences in terminology in each field of study.

Say, the roles of a manager (businessman, organizer with subroles of org-designer and leader, org-architect, administrator) in relation to the enterprise as a system turn out to be roughly the same as the roles of an engineer (visionary, developer with the subroles of designer and production technologist, architect, platform engineer) in relation to the system-of-interest, and this makes it possible to present the knowledge of management much simpler than the "from scratch" approach, without using the knowledge of systems engineering. This can be seen in examples of other systems. Say, if a personality is understood as a set of various skills realized by an agent (person or even robot with AI), then teaching a person or a robot something new (for example, enhancing innate intelligence through education by means of an intelligence stack) turns out to be engineering of personality. And we see the same roles there as in engineering of "hardware" or "software," as in management: culture agent (analogous to businessman, visionary), course author (analogous to organizer, developer, including the subroles of methodologist as an analog of org-designer and designer, methodologist as an analog of production technologist and leader), tutor or educational program architect (analogous to architect and org-architect), dean's office (analogous to administrator, platform engineer).

So, systems engineering in its modern understanding is changing the world for the better, in all its variety of systems. **Labor** turned out to be just different forms of engineering various systems. Labor was usually understood not only as "hard labor" from the perspective of workers but also as improving the world from the perspective of consumers of labor products. Earlier, labor was associated with agriculture, then with engineering "factory" change at the level of inert matter, which was not "animated" with computers, remember the "labor lessons" in school fifty years ago, where it was necessary to make a stool or turn a part on a lathe.

Now the limitation on the type of systems associated as a product of labor has been removed. Labor, practice, activity, engineering, even culture and style as a method/mode of performing work (i.e., changing the state of the physical world)—everything turned out to be more or less synonymous if these words are used scale-free, for all possible systems levels. Although each word has some nuances of meaning, we will examine them further in the course. A detailed consideration of labor as behavior according to some pattern (method/culture/practice) of an intellectual agent as a system-creator of some system-product is dedicated to a separate course "Methodology." In our course "Systems Thinking" we will primarily consider the system-of-interest, but not the system-creators in their creation graph, where some creators create and develop other creators. System-creators with their creation graphs will be examined in detail in the course "Methodology," methods for creating and developing system-products in their most general form in the course "Systems Engineering," methods of programming intellectual creators for performing some work methods (i.e., teaching agents these methods)—in the course "Personality Engineering," system-creators of humans and machines (organizations)—in the course "Systems Management."

Systems engineering as a universal normative ("how it's supposed to be done," norm of engineering work) method of work will also have a dedicated course. There is also a separate course on personality engineering. Meanwhile, the courses "Systems Engineering," "Systems Management," and "Personality Engineering" are based on the material from the courses "Systems Thinking" and "Methodology," allowing them to be similarly structured. One time it is told how to do something, it will always be more or less the same in general terms (design, manufacture, operate—and repeat this in a cycle of development)—then one can tell only some features that distinguish the engineering of different types of systems. Learn once, use always!

The most contemporary but already outdated definition of systems engineering is given in the Guide to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge in 2023: "Systems Engineering is a transdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of successful systems. Successful systems must satisfy the needs of their customers, users, and other stakeholders"^[<https://sebokwiki.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Systems_Engineering>, SE is a transdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of successful systems. Successful systems must satisfy the needs of their customers, users, and other stakeholders.]. In this guide's glossary, other definitions are also provided, such as the one from the honorary members (Fellows) of INCOSE 2019: "A transdisciplinary and integrative approach to enable the successful realization, use, and retirement of engineered systems, using systems principles and concepts, and scientific, technological, and management methods"^[<http://sebokwiki.org/wiki/Systems_Engineering_%28glossary%29>, A transdisciplinary and integrative approach to enable the successful realization, use, and retirement of engineered systems, using systems principles and concepts, and scientific, technological, and management methods.]. These definitions highlight:

-   **Successful concept, realization, use, and retirement of the engineered system** **in the physical world, accounting for the multiplicity versions of continuously developing systems**—this is systems engineering as a specific "method of work"/"type of labor"/activity, method/culture/style/practice of work (and in unique cases chosen for a particular project—strategy). The word "successful" (successful) here is extremely important and has not everyday but terminological special meaning. The term **"successful"** means that the project takes into account **role preferences** (this is also a systems approach term; we'll examine it in more detail in the following course sections) of both agents affecting the system and agents affected by the system and its project. Abstracting from whether these agents are humans, or AIs, or if these humans and AIs are organized into organizations or even societies, we won't deal with the multi-level nature of agents in the hierarchy of part-whole relationships of these agents yet. If role preferences (that is, dictated by some applied work methods) of all these agents in the roles of customers, payers, users, and others (the interests/preferences of malicious roles, say thieves, are accounted with a negative sign) are taken into account, then this will be "success." Thus, success here is defined not by everyday, financial, or ecological criteria, or any other way, but precisely through the acceptability of the project result for a plurality of agents-in-roles. **Success is defined as** **"in the project, we have convinced everyone, all are satisfied."** **"We've convinced everyone,"** incidentally, is a stronger phrase than **"we've agreed with everyone."** Because if these "everyone" haven’t agreed among themselves, then our agreement with everyone collapses, so it is more reliable to convince everyone (including ourselves), meaning that organizational work is also done, not just engineering work. This was the innovation of the second generation of the systems approach: creator agents (then—humans and their organizations, now including AI) as supersystems of the system-of-interest (needs come from them), and the system-of-interest (the engineering project team) are no less important than the new system they create.
-   The term **"systems"** is used in a very specific sense: these are "systems" in the systems approach, not the everyday word for "some complex objects." For systems engineering, the word "system" is roughly what "physical body" is for Newtonian mechanics—if you say about a computer "physical body," it automatically involves talking about mass, shape, volume, potential energy, elasticity modulus, temperature, and so on, but certainly not price and not the performance of the computer. If you say "system" about a computer, it automatically involves talking about system levels involved in the work on the creation and development of the computer (transistors, microchips, printed circuit boards, assembled computer—from computer going down to parts) and with a finished computer (arranging the workspace, installing and using various software, from the physical boundary of the computer upwards to the supersystem) the roles of different agents and their role preferences in important characteristics of the computer (concerns), then the discussion goes about the use concept, the system concept, architecture, continuous system development and so on. In our course, all these concepts will be examined in detail.
-   **Transdisciplinary and integrative/interdisciplinary approach**—systems engineering as a method claims that it works with all other applied engineering methods (though not only engineering ones). **Transdisciplinarity** (transdisciplinary) means externality/"otherworldliness" in relation to various other disciplines (and in our case also to other methods based on these disciplines/theories/knowledge), not being "between" other disciplines. Transdisciplinarity is a very strong statement, it means that systems engineering is included in numerous other applied methods themselves, it is not "on an equal footing" with them but is used directly within the reasoning of applied methods. In INCOSE, from where this definition is taken, nothing is said about the intelligence stack, but what is meant is that systems engineering is included as a method in the intelligence stack itself, not being an applied discipline outside it. Systems engineering due to its transdisciplinarity can "harness a horse and a delicate doe together." For example, systems engineering connects people and AI in roles of mechanical engineers, ballisticians, cryogenics, psychologists, medics, astronomers, programmers, etc., in manned spaceflight projects, coordinating their work in these highly complex projects using systems engineering concepts. The interdisciplinary approach of systems engineering means that using the method of systems engineering makes it possible to combine the labor of many people working by various applied methods. Today, it becomes clear that the most important characteristic of transdisciplinary knowledge is its scale-free nature as applicability to systems of any size/scale/system level, from molecules to humanity with its technosphere as a whole, and also extending to scale-free time, accounting for techno-evolution. And, of course, transdisciplinarity implies non-anthropocentrism, agents can be not only humans/homo sapiens.
-   The word **"realization"** means exactly this: creating a material (physical, occupying space-time, i.e., tangible/material) successful system. It's about changing the physical world, it isn't confined only to design and other informational work, the project reaches physical reality and changes it. As physicists like to point out, "a mathematician and an astrophysicist, after all, are also tangible objects, physical systems." The same applies to humanity as a whole: it's quite physical. So, tasks can be set for engineers to change humanity along with its technosphere. The question is only whether these set tasks can be carried out afterward, but in physics, it's not forbidden, so such tasks can be considered. For example, set a task for humanity not to go extinct in the next ten thousand years and see what happens.
-   **Use of systems approach principles and concepts** speaks for itself. If these concepts aren’t used, then it’s not systems engineering but something else!
-   **Methods of work** systems engineering takes not only **scientific** but also **technological** (obtained by trial and error), and even **managerial** (but not, for example, religious). In the course "Systems Engineering," the question is considered whether systems engineering is scientific or non-scientific, and there is exactly this answer: scientific and non-scientific simultaneously. On the one hand, no scientific achievements are rejected, they make engineers' lives much easier. But if a medieval engineer is asked to build a bridge over the river, and he answers that structural mechanics will be invented in three hundred years, so he will not build the bridge, "this is unscientific"? This is an example by Billy Koen, who clearly states that engineering is not limited to the use of "scientific knowledge," but it develops quite in line with how science develops: there are guesses about what constitutes the best methods of systems engineering, then these guesses are criticized, and guesses that have survived this criticism are precisely the contemporary version of systems engineering. The methods of thinking about work methods in engineering ("hardware," "software," living systems, AI, personalities, communities—it doesn't matter) are covered in the course "Methodology."

In English, "systems engineering"—though earlier writings were "system engineering." The correct interpretation (and the correct translation) is exactly "systems" (implying the use of a systems approach) engineering, not **engineering of systems** when any "object" is labeled "system," but the systems approach isn't fully used. Under the term engineering of systems^[see Prof. Derek Hitchins, "Systems Engineering vs. Engineering of Systems—Semantics?", <http://systems.hitchins.net/profs-blog/systems-engineering-vs.html>] (e.g., control systems engineering, manufacturing systems engineering) are common engineering specialties, and the word "system" can be easily discarded there, indicating just some "scientific gloss." Applied engineers easily call any object a "system" without consciously using systems thinking, i.e., without using the systems approach and without aligning the preferences of various design roles in important characteristics of the system and the project characteristics. In the best case, subject engineers will say about the system that "it consists of interacting parts"—this is usually the end of the conversation about the "system" and "systemness," it doesn't last more than twenty seconds, the concept of "system" here means about the same as "system" in classical physics. People working on the "engineering of systems" are very useful and necessary, but they are not systems engineers.

However, the qualifier "systems" cannot be removed from systems engineering without changing the meaning of the concept. Informally defined, **systems engineering is engineering with systems thinking in mind** (not any engineering dealing with objects prestigiously named systems just to indicate the complexity of these objects and scientific nature "like in physics" in their description).

It would be fair to state that any engineering that starts relying on fundamental methods of the intelligence stack becomes systems engineering. This applies even to engineering traditionally not considered as such (the same management, or medicine, or child education). All of them in fact become "systemic" if they are conducted by methods of the modern intelligence stack, even if explicitly the word "systemic" is not added to these engineerings and the word "engineering" is not mentioned. It’s just a question of how contemporary the version of the systems approach and the other positions from the fundamental theories/discipl