---
title: Terms-Words are Important and Not Important
---

The paradox "pay attention to words and don't pay attention to
words"/**"terms are important and not important"** arises when, on the one hand, we recognize that our main way of obtaining information about the world is to listen to or read someone's not very formal and strict speech, to study some formal models (but these formal models are also described in words). You don't know the terms---you won't understand what they are talking about. On the other hand, words are not important, terms are nothing---we are interested in the concepts they denote! And one should not be deluded by chains of letters on paper or chains of phonemes in oral speech (that is, be deluded by sign-terms): different people use them to mean different things. For example, the traditional problem in the administration of organizations (finance, HR, and other services with a predominance of accounting and state accounting, explained in more detail in the course "Systems Management", in educational organizations these are deanships, detailed in the course "Personality Engineering")---is the designation of completely different objects by one term. For example:

-   "Business trip" for the manager sending the employee on a "business trip" means "doing the job remotely". It includes some business travel, as well as completing a task that cannot be done without the trip.
-   "Business trip" for the employee means "business travel". Most likely, the task from this trip is just considered work by the employee, but the trip itself (transport, hotels, non-home food, and everything related to it) is the "business trip".
-   "Business trip" for accounting means "the reportable part of the business trip", that is, only the transport, hotels, and food that will be paid for and need to be somehow confirmed.

If a "business trip" is discussed, the same term will denote three different objects, confusion and disputes are inevitable! It seems that such "three different objects" named by one word-term exist for most situations employees and their managers have to interact with the administration about. And that's precisely why it's so hard to discuss issues with financial, HR, and other administrative services: everyone is talking about different things using the same word.

We use words-terms in life in two ways:

-   **They give a hint about the role in which the person** **speaking**
    **these words is now engaged in, related to some activity/cultural role play**. If someone says "balance," "profit and loss statement," "cash gap," we guess that we have a financier, accountant, or economist in front of us. And then we must be careful in choosing finance-related words-terms: in this subject area, "expenditures," "costs," and "expenses" mean different things (you should know this from management perspective)! But you've been warned, you've already guessed that the conversation is with a person-in-role, and you'll be careful not to confuse these words. So, a word-term is used here among other words-terms as a marker of which discipline/theory/method the conversation is about, what concepts are used in the conversation, as concepts are rarely used alone! You need to accept and consider that the people around you speak not just foreign languages, but when they are in some activities/cultural/professional/project roles, they use tricky dialects with tricky meanings of seemingly familiar words (as in the case of "business trip," you need to be attentive). It's a myth that under the words of a natural language (even if they are words-terms) the same concepts are hidden in the speech of different people in different roles (places in the space of meanings^[For more about the space of meanings,
    concepts, and terms see the book "Visual Thinking",
    <https://ridero.ru/books/vizualnoe_myshlenie/>]).
    This is especially true if we talk about translations into Russian!
    Ask your interlocutor again to understand how he uses a term suspicious to you in terms of its meaning in his professional dialect---let him give some examples of situations where he needs to use this word (do not ask for a definition! It's useless, and often even harmful). Always remember that interlocutors do not necessarily use terms in the meanings you are used to---and when you say these terms to them, they will understand you differently than you expect, and when they say these terms to you, you will understand them differently than they expect.
    **Terms** **are important!** **Choose your words when you speak! Think about what the terms mean that you hear from interlocutors!**
-   When it becomes clear what activity role the interlocutor is playing,
    it is possible to restore his concept by the term. We purposefully use words as terms for understanding or expressing---already knowing with the help of other mentioned words-terms in the concepts of which discipline to look for this concept. The understanding of the term when listening/perceiving and reading, as well as your use of the term in speech or writing when expressing the designated concept depends heavily on what activity role your interlocutor is playing---that is, you can judge the concept by considering this role and the method used by this role. If it is about the "balance", then you first, by other words-terms in the speech, need to understand that it is not about the balance of administrative forces in the company's management (everyday usage of the word, unlikely there was any "theory/discipline"), not about the balance of supply and demand (the role of an economist, a term from the discipline of economics), but about the accounting balance (a term from the discipline of accounting). And further you need to talk to this person (while he is in the role you identified), using his dialect. Continue to speak his language. Re-teaching a role player in the language you prefer for discussing your areas of interest is both impossible and harmful: you will destroy the language in which the person performing the professional role has maximum intuition about his subject area---if he has this intuition. If the activity role is played by a random person (or unadjusted AI), then he has no clear professional area of interest, he does not know the important characteristics of the system and his preferences in them, "did not learn the role," does not know words from the role, that is, does not master the professional dialect, has no intuition, and if he does, it is erroneous and so on---then either change the role player to another performer, or teach him whatever dialect you desire, put your favorite words in his mouth for some concepts. Or stop the discussion, it will all be fruitless: if this is a "random passer-by on the internet," stop the conversation, leave.