---
title: Descriptions and Methods of Description, Models and Meta-Models
---

A description/view of certain aspects of a system consists of one or multiple distinct **models**. Here, of course, "consists of" is not a composition relationship for physical objects, we hope you have already noted this for yourself. Often, therefore, the words "consists of" are replaced with the evasive "groups" (the description groups models), and in the opposite direction — "are grouped into" (models are grouped into a description).

A model is a set of some objects (physical or abstract/informational) that behaves in some way similar to the behavior of the modeled object, that is, it describes this modeled object (the modeled object does not necessarily have to be a system — you can model anything, "an object is everything that is the subject of our consideration"). The types of these modeled objects are given by meta-models and are taken from the theories/explanations of the description/modeling method (viewpoint). Models can have varying degrees of formality (up to and including the point where the most informal descriptions may not be considered "non-model descriptions" by standards, but we will not consider them this way).

For example, a complete Systems view includes a "financial view" of an enterprise::creator (and between the view and the described subject, there is a representation relation, all of this was discussed in the "Rational Work" course).

In the financial view, you can distinguish different constituent models needed to answer different questions of the role interested in finance:

-   balance (balance),
-   profit and loss report (profit and loss, P&L),
-   cash flow (cash flow).

If you have only the balance sheet, you cannot answer the question of the enterprise's break-even point, and if you have the profit and loss report and even the balance sheet, you won't be able to discuss the cash gap without the cash flow documents. One view for one area of interest (with several subjects of interest), three different models for three narrower areas, down to individual subjects of interest (of course, subjects of interest/important characteristics can be clarified).

All these decisions about how detailed, broad, or narrow to consider some important characteristics of the system are subjective and are the result of agreements in the project. But it would be good to know the general principles of reaching such agreements, to discuss what — so that these agreements can be achieved faster.

Each model must be made using one of the meta-models/model kinds (this was discussed in detail in the "Rational Work" course when talking about ontological descriptions), and each meta-model sets certain languages, rules, and other **modeling conventions** (for example, which objects we assign which types of meta-model or meta-meta-model, and how we will choose object names and type names from long rows of synonyms).

Just as individual models (models), responsible for dealing with some interest, are combined into a more complete description (view), responsible for dealing with interests in a certain area of interest, so are meta-models (metamodels/model kinds), which define the language, rules, and modeling techniques used in role-specific/contextual/descriptive views, combined into **methods** **of** **description** (viewpoints), reflecting/fram subjects of interest (concerns) in areas of interest (area of concern). Methods of description with their meta-models and other modeling conventions are often described in a special document called "modeling conventions." Often for models with some data about the real world, the meta-model is called a "data model" (data = system model, data model = system meta-model).

For example, for the financial view/view of a creating system-enterprise, you first need to choose one of the "methods of description"/viewpoint — RAS (Russian Accounting Standards) or IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards). When compiling the balance sheet (one model of financial view) and the profit and loss report (another model of financial view), meta-models (conventions on how to make models) for these types of models from one of the description methods must be used — either RAS or IFRS.

We remember that there is also the level of meta-meta-model (that RAS::viewpoint — is exactly the use of material from our course for assigning a type, we said that RAS is a method of description, used the type of meta-meta-model of a fundamental discipline, a common type for all disciplines. While RAS represents a meta-model, a method of description for a subject/applied discipline).

The simplest way is to consider that a method of description is a set of conventions for multi-layered map-models that describe the territory.

Let us remind you what you already know from the "Rational Work" course:

-   The map is not the territory, but a model of the territory. One does not walk on a map but on the terrain. However, you usually choose a route on a map. The thing is, the set of conventions (viewpoint) will not give you a map (view), you will have to make it yourself, to model some area (domain). And then generate several hiking routes on this map, criticize them ("wow, this route leads to a swamp! Let's not go there!"), choose according to some decision theory the best way to act, the best route (the best method of work), and then even make yourself (and convince others) follow this route, that is, in addition to choosing the method, also do the work itself according to the method. This is all a metaphor, of course, but you need to understand this metaphor. In any case, your thought should reach real work, for which you need to determine the method (strategize: find out the method in cases where the method is unknown), each method has its objects of the method from its subject area, they are given in some model, and this model has its meta-model.
-   There are several levels of abstraction, they are the same meta-modeling, from the most general theory model (theory theory — "everything is objects and relations," this can be considered foundational ontology, not to be confused with the "foundation model"/LLM) through the meta-meta-model as a set of types for objects and relations from fundamental methods of thinking (including the set of systems approach types — "system," "environment," "system level," "creator," etc.), then the meta-model of some subject area (including management with its types: org-architecture, organigram, output/throughput, etc.), then the model with its values (for example, throughput of 3 sepulks per day at \$30). Of course, there can be more levels (you can distinguish between a metaU-model, a metaS-model). As a matter of fact, there is the territory (world), the map (model), the meta-model (map of the map, that is, a system of designations for the domain), there is a meta-meta-model (map of the map of the map, that is, a system of designations for the system of designations of the map, universal for all systems of designations, that is, for all domains), and even a meta-meta-meta model (a system of designations for the system of designations for the system of designations of the map). In Systems thinking you must keep all of this and not confuse them. If you suddenly speak in terms of the meta-meta-model (words from our course), no one will understand you. Discuss the map, not the system of designations. But you yourself should keep in mind where the designations on the map came from and where the designations in the table of designations came from.
-   At any level of abstraction, you can model either strictly (a map to scale, with exact designations in some projection) or not very strictly (a child's map, a subway map — where it is important to convey to people poorly versed in cartography some idea, not to have an exact model). In modeling, this is the choice of the level of formality — from formality considering the univalent foundations of mathematics (they will be stricter than the foundations of mathematics built on set theory, and imply constructivism — not even theory theory with objects and relations, but still poorly defined and extremely rare frontier theory of concepts with objects and operations of their construction, we will discuss this in more detail in the next section of our course) to the formality of epic tales when you suddenly go from the meta-meta-meta-model (foundational ontology) based on objects and relations to analogies (say, prototype theory of concepts when fruits are defined as "different versions of apples, less and less similar to apples"), concept blending and other non-logics, almost to linguistics. After all, people mainly use the fast and easy S1 thinking mode, not the hard and inconvenient S2 thinking mode. S1 reasoning is difficult to criticize, they are "analog," but S2 reasoning is easily criticized — there logic works, and there you are either right, or you are wrong. If accuracy matters to you, you need to be formal: rockets are not built on inaccurate reasoning, submarines sink, enterprises go bankrupt. But if you will always be strictly logical, you will not be able to talk to "simple people."

In any case, **you cannot describe anything if you have not realized how exactly you describe it, by which method** **of** **description!** **You cannot understand someone's description if you have not realized how exactly, by which method of description someone's description was made!**

You can't make maps and/or allow other project roles to examine maps if neither the mapmaker nor the other project roles know the map legend and cartography methods. Maps made by different methods of description cannot be compared with each other later. You cannot make a map using layers prepared according to different cartography methods — you cannot take a map of the city's water resources prepared by surveyors and a map of subway stations prepared by the metropolitan services and just overlay them on each other. You cannot take a balance sheet according to RAS and make a profit and loss statement according to IFRS. All models (models) in the view should be prepared using meta-models from one method of description (viewpoint). And yes, the method of descriptions should be agreed upon with the project role, as depending on the subject of interest and the preferences of the role in the characteristics of this subject of interest, different project roles will require different methods of descriptions! For instance, accountants will demand financial views according to IFRS (and for them, cost description will be important), while operational managers will reject such views and insist on keeping their own financial records because they will consider "cost" a misleading characteristic, insisting on completely different financial calculation methods more suitable not for taxation purposes but for operational management purposes. They might insist on using methods of description accepted in "throughput accounting" from Goldratt's Theory of Constraints^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Throughput_accounting>].

The question is, how to be here — if everyone needs some different descriptions? How to be, for example, with the same financial accounting (for managers, pre mortem) and accounting (for tax inspections, post mortem)? Of course, you just need to make several different descriptions! It won't harm the described subject if you take its photographs from different angles, with different cameras, and sometimes even a video recording, and then add an x-ray, and then add a textual description in poetry.

Thus, managers can organize a SelfAccounting according to Goldratt, and OthersAccounting1 according to RAS (for their tax authorities) and OthersAccounting2 according to IFRS (for shareholders, for example). This is okay, this is normal, this is how it should be done — just keep an eye on describing the same object (the enterprise's money and their movement), not different ones. Sometimes they talk about correspondence rules between objects of different descriptions, but these correspondence rules are not always possible to define, so don't delude yourself: there may be no correspondence between a photo of a boiling kettle in infrared light and an itemized list of components for making a kettle. But in different engineering modelers, there might be different icons representing the same functional object — and here you can indicate that there is correspondence between some functional block from DIN 66001 and a functional module from IEC 61346. Of course, to discover such correspondence, you must raise to the meta-level concerning these standards: understand that all these objects are functional objects and not constructive or placement objects.

The method of description is most often **library-based**, meaning that instead of detailing its content, a reference to literature on this method is provided. This is like giving a reference to a book or a cartography standard instead of the full text and pictures of the map legend, where a list of symbols and detailed instructions on how to use these symbols to depict terrain details, flora, fauna, minerals, population density, etc., are given. But if there is no text with a ready-to-use method of description, then you will have to describe some subject of interest in a way that has not been used so far. Then, instead of this reference to a library-based method of description, you must attach a method of description documented by yourself to the description: without indicating the method of description, descriptions cannot be done. The method of description is the alpha, so an artifact/work product/document will be required to witness the state of this alpha. And the description needs documentation, and the method of description needs documentation.

The main thing to remember: **any description is a system description, any system description is made using a method of description** (even if the describer does not realize this), the description becomes available to people only after its **documentation**, the method of description is a description of the description (therefore, questions about the method of description of the method of description, and the documentation of the method of description of the method of description are appropriate!).

The method of description (viewpoint) frames some characteristic important for the role performing the method of work (concern of this role). One of the consequences: **if a project role/stakeholder** **has no corresponding** **"concern"/interest, then a description/view** **to satisfy interest in this** **missing** **characteristic** **is not made: descriptions** **that do not address any** **important for** **methods of work** **characteristics of any of the roles are unnecessary, they are redundant.** Accordingly, this description is not documented, and the method of description for it is not needed.

Even if some regulation or standard you use (which you seem to be required to follow) demands a certain description, but you find that no one will ever read it (for example, managers will merely check the fact of the description's existence “for compliance with the standard,” but even in case of realization of some risks, no one will delve into these descriptions, no one will open them and use them for substantive discussions) — such a description need not be made, it's a senseless waste of project resources. And on the contrary: **if any project role** **finds an interest/** **importance in some characteristic/"subject of interest"/concern** **and intends to discuss it with other project roles, or even use it for their own reasoning and role-based decisions,** **the description** **including that characteristic is made** **and must** **be documented.** It is never about verbal answers to questions. On paper, or in a database, or in files, but the description must be documented.

Say, you made a decision at a meeting. This decision is a description of a future situation, a certain state of certain objects. Not recorded (and not in the minutes, as minutes do not survive longer than a couple of weeks, then they are forgotten) — it means the decision has not been made, but merely "discussed." Written decisions will undoubtedly be different from what everyone "thought" they heard orally; there will be found errors, inconsistencies with other previously made decisions, etc. Descriptions are by no means only the descriptions prescribed in some engineering or managerial standards! One must very strictly distinguish between systems (and situations, that is systems in some states, accounting for changes in their states) and system descriptions, as well as comply with all the requirements for descriptions, whatever they may be. For example, a decision at a meeting: if this is a description (view), then it must also include a method of description (viewpoint). What exactly are you describing, what types of main objects will be in your description of the meeting decision?

Approaches to descriptions (views) according to ISO 42010:2022 can be of two types: projective and synthetic.

**Projective** descriptions are like in a stage spotlight where the lamp is white, but we make a colored beam by filtering out all colors except the one we like. In fact, it means we have a large database that stores all interrelated different models of different role views — all together, corresponding to some data model. This data model is a common ontology of very different subject domains. When we need data from one model (model), it just filters out what we need in terms of a meta-model (requested role views, or even requested individual models from these views) and displays it in suitable document formats. If we look at some classes of computer corporate software (ERP, CRM, PLM, and other "three-letter abbreviations"), inside each such software, we will find a database attempting to embody a projective description. If you want to get some specific description with individual system characteristics, you just need to perform a query in the query language for that database.

**Synthetic** descriptions are the opposite: the initial role views are given as separate model documents, where each model is documented not just as part of one common database for all models (as in projective descriptions) but as separate paper or electronic documents in separate ontology. **Correspondence rules** (correspondence rules, "this object of this model is that element of that model") are established between these autonomous models from separate documents if possible, and the overall model of a system description is thus obtained synthetically, by combining separate autonomous types of models. Reasonings about system/complete and role/aspectual system views do not change from how these views are assembled from model documents — immediately in a common document (projective approach to views) or after creating separate model documents (synthetic approach). You can't say which method wins:

-   The projective method is very convenient: everything is gathered in one place and even coordinated. Problems like "here I have length in feet, and you have it in meters, but here they have it in parrots" don't occur, meta-modeling is centralized!
-   This is a nightmare for architects: to slightly tweak some description, you have to tweak all descriptions together, maintaining this coordination! The projective method becomes a "bottleneck," effectively prohibiting the autonomous work of teams dealing with different descriptions.
-   If you already have autonomous modelers, convenient for documenting some separate descriptions within the synthetic approach, it's very difficult to force them to abandon them to switch to new modelers that store their models in a common database within the projective approach — the effort to retrain people and reconfigure tools is often considered not very justified, even if constantly facing some collisions between models. Of course, the number of collisions is significantly higher with the synthetic approach.

Synthetic and projective descriptions turn out to be equivalent in terms of reasoning about working with descriptions. ISO 42010:2022 explicitly states that all basic ideas about working with descriptions (e.g., the requirement to specify a viewpoint for any view) work for both options. Just in synthetic descriptions, a lot of effort is required to coordinate independently prepared descriptions, "lifecycle data