---
title: Orglinks
---

In Systems made up of people, constructs are first and foremost the people themselves, with their audio, visual, tactile, and other interfaces. The functions of people are not even attempted to be discussed, nor the meaning and content of the information or changes in the environment that come to and go from people through the interfaces of the human body. People are universal creators. We remember the definition of universal creators by David Deutsch, which essentially expands the definition of universal computers by Alan Turing: given sufficient resources and time, they can perform any transformation of the physical world allowed by the principles of physics, just as a universal computer can perform any computation given enough time and memory. Among other things, people can replicate themselves when resources are insufficient, build tools first, and then carry out the necessary transformation, working collectively and using tools.

This provides a constructive/productive consideration of people, i.e., a consideration of "how to make," how to compose a system from people as they are at the start of the work, since we do not discuss functionality. We consider that because people are universal creators, they can be trained to perform necessary functions. In essence, we are concerned not even with people but with universal agents — robots with sufficiently strong AI are also suitable for our considerations.

Intellectual agents have a special type of relationship that denotes the ability to manage specific means of production or even other people: we are talking about ownership rights, the authority to give orders to other people, the right to accept work from others, the authority to exchange certain items or services (including "universal items" like money).

To obtain the required external behavior from an agent, one must have the relevant authorities recognized by them. Agents who agree on the authority over each other and their means of production, on mutual obligations, are called **organized**, and a system of such people is called an **organization/orglink providing services for other organizations/orglinks**. The term "organization" is most often used concerning the top of the constructive decomposition of a system of intellectual agents (primarily people) and means of production. These organizations are enterprises/firms/companies. In the case of state and public/non-commercial organizations, other names are used — bodies, agencies, institutions, associations, funds, etc.

Constructs from which organizations are built (i.e., individual agents or organized groups of agents with their tools) we will call not "department" but a more general term — **orglink**.

The term "orglink" is better than "department" because constructives of orgstructure usually do not show temporary organized groups of agents and their tools (means of production): project teams (projects are temporary by definition!), as well as various councils, committees, circles, commissions, etc. But when you are told that "to launch a new project, you need the decision of the scientific-technical council," you need to take into account such an org-construct as the scientific-technical council, which evidently exists in the organization structure but is not called a "department." The structure of "departments" is usually convenient for payroll, counting the number of employees, but if an employee starts working in several different overlapping organizations (in a department, in some council, and a couple of project groups), discussing this in terms of departments is impossible: councils and project groups are not included in the staff schedules. If we generalize the concept of division to all entities entitled to make some decisions and execute actions related to those decisions and include such "collegial bodies" that convene for separate meetings (often through mail lists or chat discussions) and constantly working project teams recruited from division employees "bypassing the official staff schedule," then we get an "organizational link"/orglink::constructive — a type of part from which the organization is constructed.

The minimum orglink, therefore, is one person or one AI agent (and it does not matter if it's an AI bot implemented somewhere in data centers or an AI robot whose "brains" might also be in data centers, and it might be represented in the world not by one body, but several, not necessarily anthropomorphic). Since agents do not change the physical world with bare hands and do not use bare channels of perception, the minimum orglink will include not only the agent but also their tools, which they are authorized to manage. Since agents in the organization should cooperate, they are called employees. The minimum orglink is one employee with the assigned equipment/tools (we will also consider premises and furniture as equipment/tools here).

These minimal orglinks/employees/agents (some of them are people) from one agent are further united based on known permissions into the next-level orglinks, and so on until the highest-level orglink becomes the organization as a whole (enterprise, institution, association, fund, etc.). Sometimes the primary association of orglinks is called a **team,** usually comprising 5-12 agents, and now they often talk about a team as "the number of people that can be fed with two large American pizzas at lunch" (two pizza team). It's unclear how to deal with teams of robots, people, and robots — probably still consider it as 5-12 intellectual agents, with some teams being 2-5 agents (Tesla mentions such small crews — mob/gang).

Sometimes another level is introduced — **collective,** a "team of teams." But remember that when different hierarchy levels (here — the part-whole hierarchy for orglinks) are named differently — it seems convenient at first, but becomes inconvenient as changes in the number of levels for particular branches of this hierarchy increase. For rhetorical (persuasion) purposes, even the population of a country can be called a "team" to emphasize belonging to a "small organization" and readiness to implement agreed work plans (however, the desire, of course, differs from the possibilities — everything we know about autonomous agents like people and similar robots already does not fully fit organizations, although both are "persons" and "parties" taking responsibility for executing some plans. This marks "organizing." But with **communities** (agents engaging in some methods of work and sharing experience in practicing these methods, for example, community of practice^[<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_of_practice>]), the situation is different, and with societies (agents compactly living in some territories without discussing any common work methods) — even more so. So discussions about orglinks end at not very far systems levels from a single organization — precisely at those levels where, through some clear agreement (and not merely coercive measures like "paid your taxes — and sleep peacefully"), one can speak of performing organized tasks as a system according to some strategy, i.e., working according to some agreed methods on changing the state of certain items of this method, considering the division of labor among the organization's members.

From communities and societies, we cannot expect this, but we can expect it from production cooperatives, business ecosystems around marketplaces as platforms, and organized political movements and parties, since they have mechanisms to agree on labor organization (to divide into agents performing distinct roles, i.e., works by certain methods, and to agree on how they understand which works with which method objects should be done to eventually create a successful target system).

At extended levels, therefore, coordinated actions to use resources are carried out based on direct agreements for creating "extended enterprises" (extended enterprise, organizations consisting of organizations that agree to perform certain joint tasks). For example, a nuclear power plant is built by an extended enterprise — hundreds and thousands of contractor enterprises, not just one construction and installation organization ("construction" means "construction" plus "installation of complex equipment"). The construction and installation organization of the nuclear power plant has contracts with its contractors, defining who is responsible for what in building the nuclear power plant: not at the individual level, but at the organizational level.

The entire organizational (constructive) structure and interfaces between orglinks (organization constructs) are discussed not regarding how to do something better in the applied domain (organization/orglink's working time), but exactly about "how to organize" — who will fulfill whose orders, what and when will be purchased as means of production, and who will manage it. The subject of modular/organizational discussion in organization/orglinks is organizing (achieving a state of organizedness, where the authorities of all employees are clear). Why so? Orglinks are considered as agents and collective agents, moreover, universal. This means they can be assigned different functions, instructed to perform work by other methods, and directed a different stream of method objects.

Services of orgroles assigned to orglinks (both regular divisions and "collegial bodies," temporary project groups — project teams, task forces, divisions, councils, committees, commissions, etc.), provided by them at their organizational interfaces, the discussion of interfaces and interface modules/channels (mail, issue tracker, cash desk window, conveyor belt, etc.) for interacting with them, are a typical subject of discussion in organizations. These services in good organizations try to standardize (regulate: bring under the enterprise level standard, publish the standard), make some sort of orgplatform with a published interface out of them. The main problem here: in large organizations, centralizing such regulation leads to people working without following these regulations — simply because it is inconvenient for them to use documents and operational software that are sufficiently far from their workplace. The solution here is decentralizing work with regulations and checklists. Detailed methods are covered in the courses "Methodology" and "Systems Management." By the way, everything else about orglinks is covered in the "Systems Management" course, which is precisely about creating organizations, management being the creation and development (including operation) of organizations, i.e., the engineering of organizations.

An organization/enterprise is literally composed, constructed, made from its orglinks — these are the constructive, not functional parts of an enterprise/organization. From the discussion of an organizational chart, you cannot tell how an enterprise works, what functions the orglinks of the enterprise perform. But you can tell "what it is made from" — out of which divisions.

Naming orglinks — is a consideration of "how it is made, what it is composed of," reflecting this constructive, not functional aspect. The names convey the most general ideas of the service provided, unrelated to the purpose/function of this service. Workshop No. 5, Chamber No. 6 — simple numbers in names from which no functions follow, are typical indicators of constructive consideration. The most general words without reference to the subject area (like "database" and "server" in information technology) are similar indicators (“engineering,” "legal department,” scientific-technical council, project team). Similarly, location aspect clarifications might be present in names — but still nothing can be said about functions: "Vologda Branch" is clear that it is an orglink, and clear that it is in Vologda. But what does it do? By what method does it change which method objects, what are its services as a system? All this needs to be learned from other aspectual descriptions.

Functions performed by the enterprise/orglink’s constructive elements can be numerous and unexpected. On the other hand, if "the division moves to another building,” it describes a connection between constructive and location aspects. "The division will work by new methods” — it's a discussion of the connection between functional and constructive aspects of the division.